                                     360 BC
                                     CRITO
                                    by Plato
                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
CRITO
                   PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE

                           SOCRATES
                            CRITO

               SCENE: The Prison of Socrates

  Socrates. WHY have you come at this hour, Crito? it must be quite
early.
  Crito. Yes, certainly.
  Soc. What is the exact time?
  Cr. The dawn is breaking.
  Soc. I wonder the keeper of the prison would let you in.
  Cr. He knows me because I often come, Socrates; moreover. I have
done him a kindness.
  Soc. And are you only just come?
  Cr. No, I came some time ago.
  Soc. Then why did you sit and say nothing, instead of awakening me
at once?
  Cr. Why, indeed, Socrates, I myself would rather not have all this
sleeplessness and sorrow. But I have been wondering at your peaceful
slumbers, and that was the reason why I did not awaken you, because
I wanted you to be out of pain. I have always thought you happy in the
calmness of your temperament; but never did I see the like of the
easy, cheerful way in which you bear this calamity.
  Soc. Why, Crito, when a man has reached my age he ought not to be
repining at the prospect of death.
  Cr. And yet other old men find themselves in similar misfortunes,
and age does not prevent them from repining.
  Soc. That may be. But you have not told me why you come at this
early hour.
  Cr. I come to bring you a message which is sad and painful; not,
as I believe, to yourself but to all of us who are your friends, and
saddest of all to me.
  Soc. What! I suppose that the ship has come from Delos, on the
arrival of which I am to die?
  Cr. No, the ship has not actually arrived, but she will probably
be here to-day, as persons who have come from Sunium tell me that they
have left her there; and therefore to-morrow, Socrates, will be the
last day of your life.
  Soc. Very well, Crito; if such is the will of God, I am willing; but
my belief is that there will be a delay of a day.
  Cr. Why do you say this?
  Soc. I will tell you. I am to die on the day after the arrival of
the ship?
  Cr. Yes; that is what the authorities say.
  Soc. But I do not think that the ship will be here until
to-morrow; this I gather from a vision which I had last night, or
rather only just now, when you fortunately allowed me to sleep.
  Cr. And what was the nature of the vision?
  Soc. There came to me the likeness of a woman, fair and comely,
clothed in white raiment, who called to me and said: O Socrates-

     "The third day hence, to Phthia shalt thou go."

  Cr. What a singular dream, Socrates!
  Soc. There can be no doubt about the meaning Crito, I think.
  Cr. Yes: the meaning is only too clear. But, O! my beloved Socrates,
let me entreat you once more to take my advice and escape. For if
you die I shall not only lose a friend who can never be replaced,
but there is another evil: people who do not know you and me will
believe that I might have saved you if I had been willing to give
money, but that I did not care. Now, can there be a worse disgrace
than this- that I should be thought to value money more than the
life of a friend? For the many will not be persuaded that I wanted you
to escape, and that you refused.
  Soc. But why, my dear Crito, should we care about the opinion of the
many? Good men, and they are the only persons who are worth
considering, will think of these things truly as they happened.
  Cr. But do you see. Socrates, that the opinion of the many must be
regarded, as is evident in your own case, because they can do the very
greatest evil to anyone who has lost their good opinion?
  Soc. I only wish, Crito, that they could; for then they could also
do the greatest good, and that would be well. But the truth is, that
they can do neither good nor evil: they cannot make a man wise or make
him foolish; and whatever they do is the result of chance.
  Cr. Well, I will not dispute about that; but please to tell me,
Socrates, whether you are not acting out of regard to me and your
other friends: are you not afraid that if you escape hence we may
get into trouble with the informers for having stolen you away, and
lose either the whole or a great part of our property; or that even
a worse evil may happen to us? Now, if this is your fear, be at
ease; for in order to save you, we ought surely to run this or even
a greater risk; be persuaded, then, and do as I say.
  Soc. Yes, Crito, that is one fear which you mention, but by no means
the only one.
  Cr. Fear not. There are persons who at no great cost are willing
to save you and bring you out of prison; and as for the informers, you
may observe that they are far from being exorbitant in their
demands; a little money will satisfy them. My means, which, as I am
sure, are ample, are at your service, and if you have a scruple
about spending all mine, here are strangers who will give you the
use of theirs; and one of them, Simmias the Theban, has brought a
sum of money for this very purpose; and Cebes and many others are
willing to spend their money too. I say, therefore, do not on that
account hesitate about making your escape, and do not say, as you
did in the court, that you will have a difficulty in knowing what to
do with yourself if you escape. For men will love you in other
places to which you may go, and not in Athens only; there are
friends of mine in Thessaly, if you like to go to them, who will value
and protect you, and no Thessalian will give you any trouble. Nor
can I think that you are justified, Socrates, in betraying your own
life when you might be saved; this is playing into the hands of your
enemies and destroyers; and moreover I should say that you were
betraying your children; for you might bring them up and educate them;
instead of which you go away and leave them, and they will have to
take their chance; and if they do not meet with the usual fate of
orphans, there will be small thanks to you. No man should bring
children into the world who is unwilling to persevere to the end in
their nurture and education. But you are choosing the easier part,
as I think, not the better and manlier, which would rather have become
one who professes virtue in all his actions, like yourself. And,
indeed, I am ashamed not only of you, but of us who are your
friends, when I reflect that this entire business of yours will be
attributed to our want of courage. The trial need never have come
on, or might have been brought to another issue; and the end of all,
which is the crowning absurdity, will seem to have been permitted by
us, through cowardice and baseness, who might have saved you, as you
might have saved yourself, if we had been good for anything (for there
was no difficulty in escaping); and we did not see how disgraceful,
Socrates, and also miserable all this will be to us as well as to you.
Make your mind up then, or rather have your mind already made up,
for the time of deliberation is over, and there is only one thing to
be done, which must be done, if at all, this very night, and which any
delay will render all but impossible; I beseech you therefore,
Socrates, to be persuaded by me, and to do as I say.
  Soc. Dear Crito, your zeal is invaluable, if a right one; but if
wrong, the greater the zeal the greater the evil; and therefore we
ought to consider whether these things shall be done or not. For I
am and always have been one of those natures who must be guided by
reason, whatever the reason may be which upon reflection appears to me
to be the best; and now that this fortune has come upon me, I cannot
put away the reasons which I have before given: the principles which I
have hitherto honored and revered I still honor, and unless we can
find other and better principles on the instant, I am certain not to
agree with you; no, not even if the power of the multitude could
inflict many more imprisonments, confiscations, deaths, frightening us
like children with hobgoblin terrors. But what will be the fairest way
of considering the question? Shall I return to your old argument about
the opinions of men, some of which are to be regarded, and others,
as we were saying, are not to be regarded? Now were we right in
maintaining this before I was condemned? And has the argument which
was once good now proved to be talk for the sake of talking; in fact
an amusement only, and altogether vanity? That is what I want to
consider with your help, Crito: whether, under my present
circumstances, the argument appears to be in any way different or not;
and is to be allowed by me or disallowed. That argument, which, as I
believe, is maintained by many who assume to be authorities, was to
the effect, as I was saying, that the opinions of some men are to be
regarded, and of other men not to be regarded. Now you, Crito, are a
disinterested person who are not going to die to-morrow- at least,
there is no human probability of this, and you are therefore not
liable to be deceived by the circumstances in which you are placed.
Tell me, then, whether I am right in saying that some opinions, and
the opinions of some men only, are to be valued, and other opinions,
and the opinions of other men, are not to be valued. I ask you whether
I was right in maintaining this?
  Cr. Certainly.
  Soc. The good are to be regarded, and not the bad?
  Cr. Yes.
  Soc. And the opinions of the wise are good, and the opinions of
the unwise are evil?
  Cr. Certainly.
  Soc. And what was said about another matter? Was the disciple in
gymnastics supposed to attend to the praise and blame and opinion of
every man, or of one man only- his physician or trainer, whoever
that was?
  Cr. Of one man only.
  Soc. And he ought to fear the censure and welcome the praise of that
one only, and not of the many?
  Cr. That is clear.
  Soc. And he ought to live and train, and eat and drink in the way
which seems good to his single master who has understanding, rather
than according to the opinion of all other men put together?
  Cr. True.
  Soc. And if he disobeys and disregards the opinion and approval of
the one, and regards the opinion of the many who have no
understanding, will he not suffer evil?
  Cr. Certainly he will.
  Soc. And what will the evil be, whither tending and what affcting,
in the disobedient person?
  Cr. Clearly, affecting the body; that is what is destroyed by the
evil.
  Soc. Very good; and is not this true, Crito, of other things which
we need not separately enumerate? In the matter of just and unjust,
fair and foul, good and evil, which are the subjects of our present
consultation, ought we to follow the opinion of the many and to fear
them; or the opinion of the one man who has understanding, and whom we
ought to fear and reverence more than all the rest of the world: and
whom deserting we shall destroy and injure that principle in us
which may be assumed to be improved by justice and deteriorated by
injustice; is there not such a principle?
  Cr. Certainly there is, Socrates.
  Soc. Take a parallel instance; if, acting under the advice of men
who have no understanding, we destroy that which is improvable by
health and deteriorated by disease- when that has been destroyed, I
say, would life be worth having? And that is- the body?
  Cr. Yes.
  Soc. Could we live, having an evil and corrupted body?
  Cr. Certainly not.
  Soc. And will life be worth having, if that higher part of man be
depraved, which is improved by justice and deteriorated by
injustice? Do we suppose that principle, whatever it may be in man,
which has to do with justice and injustice, to be inferior to the
body?
  Cr. Certainly not.
  Soc. More honored, then?
  Cr. Far more honored.
  Soc. Then, my friend, we must not regard what the many say of us:
but what he, the one man who has understanding of just and unjust,
will say, and what the truth will say. And therefore you begin in
error when you suggest that we should regard the opinion of the many
about just and unjust, good and evil, honorable and dishonorable.
Well, someone will say, "But the many can kill us."
  Cr. Yes, Socrates; that will clearly be the answer.
  Soc. That is true; but still I find with surprise that the old
argument is, as I conceive, unshaken as ever. And I should like to
know Whether I may say the same of another proposition- that not life,
but a good life, is to be chiefly valued?
  Cr. Yes, that also remains.
  Soc. And a good life is equivalent to a just and honorable one- that
holds also?
  Cr. Yes, that holds.
  Soc. From these premises I proceed to argue the question whether I
ought or ought not to try to escape without the consent of the
Athenians: and if I am clearly right in escaping, then I will make the
attempt; but if not, I will abstain. The other considerations which
you mention, of money and loss of character, and the duty of educating
children, are, I fear, only the doctrines of the multitude, who
would be as ready to call people to life, if they were able, as they
are to put them to death- and with as little reason. But now, since
the argument has thus far prevailed, the only question which remains
to be considered is, whether we shall do rightly either in escaping or
in suffering others to aid in our escape and paying them in money
and thanks, or whether we shan not do rightly; and if the latter, then
death or any other calamity which may ensue on my remaining here
must not be allowed to enter into the calculation.
  Cr. I think that you are right, Socrates; how then shall we proceed?
  Soc. Let us consider the matter together, and do you either refute
me if you can, and I will be convinced; or else cease, my dear friend,
from repeating to me that I ought to escape against the wishes of
the Athenians: for I am extremely desirous to be persuaded by you, but
not against my own better judgment. And now please to consider my
first position, and do your best to answer me.
  Cr. I will do my best.
  Soc. Are we to say that we are never intentionally to do wrong, or
that in one way we ought and in another way we ought not to do
wrong, or is doing wrong always evil and dishonorable, as I was just
now saying, and as has been already acknowledged by us? Are all our
former admissions which were made within a few days to be thrown away?
And have we, at our age, been earnestly discoursing with one another
all our life long only to discover that we are no better than
children? Or are we to rest assured, in spite of the opinion of the
many, and in spite of consequences whether better or worse, of the
truth of what was then said, that injustice is always an evil and
dishonor to him who acts unjustly? Shall we affirm that?
  Cr. Yes.
  Soc. Then we must do no wrong?
  Cr. Certainly not.
  Soc. Nor when injured injure in return, as the many imagine; for
we must injure no one at all?
  Cr. Clearly not.
  Soc. Again, Crito, may we do evil?
  Cr. Surely not, Socrates.
  Soc. And what of doing evil in return for evil, which is the
morality of the many-is that just or not?
  Cr. Not just.
  Soc. For doing evil to another is the same as injuring him?
  Cr. Very true.
  Soc. Then we ought not to retaliate or render evil for evil to
anyone, whatever evil we may have suffered from him. But I would
have you consider, Crito, whether you really mean what you are saying.
For this opinion has never been held, and never will be held, by any
considerable number of persons; and those who are agreed and those who
are not agreed upon this point have no common ground, and can only
despise one another, when they see how widely they differ. Tell me,
then, whether you agree with and assent to my first principle, that
neither injury nor retaliation nor warding off evil by evil is ever
right. And shall that be the premise of our agreement? Or do you
decline and dissent from this? For this has been of old and is still
my opinion; but, if you are of another opinion, let me hear what you
have to say. If, however, you remain of the same mind as formerly, I
will proceed to the next step.
  Cr. You may proceed, for I have not changed my mind.
  Soc. Then I will proceed to the next step, which may be put in the
form of a question: Ought a man to do what he admits to be right, or
ought he to betray the right?
  Cr. He ought to do what he thinks right.
  Soc. But if this is true, what is the application? In leaving the
prison against the will of the Athenians, do I wrong any? or rather do
I not wrong those whom I ought least to wrong? Do I not desert the
principles which were acknowledged by us to be just? What do you say?
  Cr. I cannot tell, Socrates, for I do not know.
  Soc. Then consider the matter in this way: Imagine that I am about
to play truant (you may call the proceeding by any name which you
like), and the laws and the government come and interrogate me:
"Tell us, Socrates," they say; "what are you about? are you going by
an act of yours to overturn us- the laws and the whole State, as far
as in you lies? Do you imagine that a State can subsist and not be
overthrown, in which the decisions of law have no power, but are set
aside and overthrown by individuals?" What will be our answer,
Crito, to these and the like words? Anyone, and especially a clever
rhetorician, will have a good deal to urge about the evil of setting
aside the law which requires a sentence to be carried out; and we
might reply, "Yes; but the State has injured us and given an unjust
sentence." Suppose I say that?
  Cr. Very good, Socrates.
  Soc. "And was that our agreement with you?" the law would sar, "or
were you to abide by the sentence of the State?" And if I were to
express astonishment at their saying this, the law would probably add:
"Answer, Socrates, instead of opening your eyes: you are in the
habit of asking and answering questions. Tell us what complaint you
have to make against us which justifies you in attempting to destroy
us and the State? In the first place did we not bring you into
existence? Your father married your mother by our aid and begat you.
Say whether you have any objection to urge against those of us who
regulate marriage?" None, I should reply. "Or against those of us
who regulate the system of nurture and education of children in
which you were trained? Were not the laws, who have the charge of
this, right in commanding your father to train you in music and
gymnastic?" Right, I should reply. "Well, then, since you were brought
into the world and nurtured and educated by us, can you deny in the
first place that you are our child and slave, as your fathers were
before you? And if this is true you are not on equal terms with us;
nor can you think that you have a right to do to us what we are
doing to you. Would you have any right to strike or revile or do any
other evil to a father or to your master, if you had one, when you
have been struck or reviled by him, or received some other evil at his
hands?- you would not say this? And because we think right to
destroy you, do you think that you have any right to destroy us in
return, and your country as far as in you lies? And will you, O
professor of true virtue, say that you are justified in this? Has a
philosopher like you failed to discover that our country is more to be
valued and higher and holier far than mother or father or any
ancestor, and more to be regarded in the eyes of the gods and of men
of understanding? also to be soothed, and gently and reverently
entreated when angry, even more than a father, and if not persuaded,
obeyed? And when we are punished by her, whether with imprisonment
or stripes, the punishment is to be endured in silence; and if she
leads us to wounds or death in battle, thither we follow as is
right; neither may anyone yield or retreat or leave his rank, but
whether in battle or in a court of law, or in any other place, he must
do what his city and his country order him; or he must change their
view of what is just: and if he may do no violence to his father or
mother, much less may he do violence to his country." What answer
shall we make to this, Crito? Do the laws speak truly, or do they not?
  Cr. I think that they do.
  Soc. Then the laws will say: "Consider, Socrates, if this is true,
that in your present attempt you are going to do us wrong. For,
after having brought you into the world, and nurtured and educated
you, and given you and every other citizen a share in every good
that we had to give, we further proclaim and give the right to every
Athenian, that if he does not like us when he has come of age and
has seen the ways of the city, and made our acquaintance, he may go
where he pleases and take his goods with him; and none of us laws will
forbid him or interfere with him. Any of you who does not like us
and the city, and who wants to go to a colony or to any other city,
may go where he likes, and take his goods with him. But he who has
experience of the manner in which we order justice and administer
the State, and still remains, has entered into an implied contract
that he will do as we command him. And he who disobeys us is, as we
maintain, thrice wrong: first, because in disobeying us he is
disobeying his parents; secondly, because we are the authors of his
education; thirdly, because he has made an agreement with us that he
will duly obey our commands; and he neither obeys them nor convinces
us that our commands are wrong; and we do not rudely impose them,
but give him the alternative of obeying or convincing us; that is what
we offer and he does neither. These are the sort of accusations to
which, as we were saying, you, Socrates, will be exposed if you
accomplish your intentions; you, above all other Athenians." Suppose I
ask, why is this? they will justly retort upon me that I above all
other men have acknowledged the agreement. "There is clear proof,"
they will say, "Socrates, that we and the city were not displeasing to
you. Of all Athenians you have been the most constant resident in
the city, which, as you never leave, you may be supposed to love.
For you never went out of the city either to see the games, except
once when you went to the Isthmus, or to any other place unless when
you were on military service; nor did you travel as other men do.
Nor had you any curiosity to know other States or their laws: your
affections did not go beyond us and our State; we were your especial
favorites, and you acquiesced in our government of you; and this is
the State in which you begat your children, which is a proof of your
satisfaction. Moreover, you might, if you had liked, have fixed the
penalty at banishment in the course of the trial-the State which
refuses to let you go now would have let you go then. But you
pretended that you preferred death to exile, and that you were not
grieved at death. And now you have forgotten these fine sentiments,
and pay no respect to us, the laws, of whom you are the destroyer; and
are doing what only a miserable slave would do, running away and
turning your back upon the compacts and agreements which you made as a
citizen. And first of all answer this very question: Are we right in
saying that you agreed to be governed according to us in deed, and not
in word only? Is that true or not?" How shall we answer that, Crito?
Must we not agree?
  Cr. There is no help, Socrates.
  Soc. Then will they not say: "You, Socrates, are breaking the
covenants and agreements which you made with us at your leisure, not
in any haste or under any compulsion or deception, but having had
seventy years to think of them, during which time you were at
liberty to leave the city, if we were not to your mind, or if our
covenants appeared to you to be unfair. You had your choice, and might
have gone either to Lacedaemon or Crete, which you often praise for
their good government, or to some other Hellenic or foreign State.
Whereas you, above all other Athenians, seemed to be so fond of the
State, or, in other words, of us her laws (for who would like a
State that has no laws?), that you never stirred out of her: the halt,
the blind, the maimed, were not more stationary in her than you
were. And now you run away and forsake your agreements. Not so,
Socrates, if you will take our advice; do not make yourself ridiculous
by escaping out of the city.
  "For just consider, if you transgress and err in this sort of way,
what good will you do, either to yourself or to your friends? That
your friends will be driven into exile and deprived of citizenship, or
will lose their property, is tolerably certain; and you yourself, if
you fly to one of the neighboring cities, as, for example, Thebes or
Megara, both of which are well-governed cities, will come to them as
an enemy, Socrates, and their government will be against you, and
all patriotic citizens will cast an evil eye upon you as a subverter
of the laws, and you will confirm in the minds of the judges the
justice of their own condemnation of you. For he who is a corrupter of
the laws is more than likely to be corrupter of the young and
foolish portion of mankind. Will you then flee from well-ordered
cities and virtuous men? and is existence worth having on these terms?
Or will you go to them without shame, and talk to them, Socrates?
And what will you say to them? What you say here about virtue and
justice and institutions and laws being the best things among men?
Would that be decent of you? Surely not. But if you go away from
well-governed States to Crito's friends in Thessaly, where there is
great disorder and license, they will be charmed to have the tale of
your escape from prison, set off with ludicrous particulars of the
manner in which you were wrapped in a goatskin or some other disguise,
and metamorphosed as the fashion of runaways is- that is very
likely; but will there be no one to remind you that in your old age
you violated the most sacred laws from a miserable desire of a
little more life? Perhaps not, if you keep them in a good temper;
but if they are out of temper you will hear many degrading things; you
will live, but how?- as the flatterer of all men, and the servant of
all men; and doing what?- eating and drinking in Thessaly, having gone
abroad in order that you may get a dinner. And where will be your fine
sentiments about justice and virtue then? Say that you wish to live
for the sake of your children, that you may bring them up and
educate them- will you take them into Thessaly and deprive them of
Athenian citizenship? Is that the benefit which you would confer
upon them? Or are you under the impression that they will be better
cared for and educated here if you are still alive, although absent
from them; for that your friends will take care of them? Do you
fancy that if you are an inhabitant of Thessaly they will take care of
them, and if you are an inhabitant of the other world they will not
take care of them? Nay; but if they who call themselves friends are
truly friends, they surely will.
  "Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you up. Think not of
life and children first, and of justice afterwards, but of justice
first, that you may be justified before the princes of the world
below. For neither will you nor any that belong to you be happier or
holier or juster in this life, or happier in another, if you do as
Crito bids. Now you depart in innocence, a sufferer and not a doer of
evil; a victim, not of the laws, but of men. But if you go forth,
returning evil for evil, and injury for injury, breaking the covenants
and agreements which you have made with us, and wronging those whom
you ought least to wrong, that is to say, yourself, your friends, your
country, and us, we shall be angry with you while you live, and our
brethren, the laws in the world below, will receive you as an enemy;
for they will know that you have done your best to destroy us. Listen,
then, to us and not to Crito."
  This is the voice which I seem to hear murmuring in my ears, like
the sound of the flute in the ears of the mystic; that voice, I say,
is humming in my ears, and prevents me from hearing any other. And I
know that anything more which you will say will be in vain. Yet speak,
if you have anything to say.
  Cr. I have nothing to say, Socrates.
  Soc. Then let me follow the intimations of the will of God.


                             -THE END-
.

                                     380 BC
                                    GORGIAS
                                    by Plato
                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
GORGIAS

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: CALLICLES; SOCRATES; CHAEREPHON; GORGIAS;
POLUS
  Scene: The house of Callicles.

  Callicles. The wise man, as the proverb says, is late for a fray,
but not for a feast.
  Socrates. And are we late for a feast?
  Cal. Yes, and a delightful feast; for Gorgias has just been
exhibiting to us many fine things.
  Soc. It is not my fault, Callicles; our friend Chaerephon is to
blame; for he would keep us loitering in the Agora.
  Chaerephon. Never mind, Socrates; the misfortune of which I have
been the cause I will also repair; for Gorgias is a friend of mine,
and I will make him give the exhibition again either now, or, if you
prefer, at some other time.
  Cal. What is the matter, Chaerephon-does Socrates want to hear
Gorgias?
  Chaer. Yes, that was our intention in coming.
  Cal. Come into my house, then; for Gorgias is staying with me, and
he shall exhibit to you.
  Soc. Very good, Callicles; but will he answer our questions? for I
want to hear from him what is the nature of his art, and what it is
which he professes and teaches; he may, as you [Chaerephon] suggest,
defer the exhibition to some other time.
  Cal. There is nothing like asking him, Socrates; and indeed to
answer questions is a part of his exhibition, for he was saying only
just now, that any one in my house might put any question to him,
and that he would answer.
  Soc. How fortunate! will you ask him, Chaerephon-?
  Chaer. What shall I ask him?
  Soc. Ask him who he is.
  Chaer. What do you mean?
  Soc. I mean such a question as would elicit from him, if he had been
a maker of shoes, the answer that he is a cobbler. Do you understand?
  Chaer. I understand, and will ask him: Tell me, Gorgias, is our
friend Callicles right in saying that you undertake to answer any
questions which you are asked?
  Gorgias. Quite right, Chaerephon: I was saying as much only just
now; and I may add, that many years have elapsed since any one has
asked me a new one.
  Chaer. Then you must be very ready, Gorgias.
  Gor. Of that, Chaerephon, you can make trial.
  Polus. Yes, indeed, and if you like, Chaerephon, you may make
trial of me too, for I think that Gorgias, who has been talking a long
time, is tired.
  Chaer. And do you, Polus, think that you can answer better than
Gorgias?
  Pol. What does that matter if I answer well enough for you?
  Chaer. Not at all:-and you shall answer if you like.
  Pol. Ask:-
  Chaer. My question is this: If Gorgias had the skill of his
brother Herodicus, what ought we to call him? Ought he not to have the
name which is given to his brother?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Chaer. Then we should be right in calling him a physician?
  Pol. Yes.
  Chaer. And if he had the skill of Aristophon the son of Aglaophon,
or of his brother Polygnotus, what ought we to call him?
  Pol. Clearly, a painter.
  Chaer. But now what shall we call him-what is the art in which he is
skilled.
  Pol. O Chaerephon, there are many arts among mankind which are
experimental, and have their origin in experience, for experience
makes the days of men to proceed according to art, and inexperience
according to chance, and different persons in different ways are
proficient in different arts, and the best persons in the best arts.
And our friend Gorgias is one of the best, and the art in which he
is a proficient is the noblest.
  Soc. Polus has been taught how to make a capital speech, Gorgias;
but he is not fulfilling the promise which he made to Chaerephon.
  Gor. What do you mean, Socrates?
  Soc. I mean that he has not exactly answered the question which he
was asked.
  Gor. Then why not ask him yourself?
  Soc. But I would much rather ask you, if you are disposed to answer:
for I see, from the few words which Polus has uttered, that he has
attended more to the art which is called rhetoric than to dialectic.
  Pol. What makes you say so, Socrates?
  Soc. Because, Polus, when Chaerephon asked you what was the art
which Gorgias knows, you praised it as if you were answering some
one who found fault with it, but you never said what the art was.
  Pol. Why, did I not say that it was the noblest of arts?
  Soc. Yes, indeed, but that was no answer to the question: nobody
asked what was the quality, but what was the nature, of the art, and
by what name we were to describe Gorgias. And I would still beg you
briefly and clearly, as you answered Chaerephon when he asked you at
first, to say what this art is, and what we ought to call Gorgias:
Or rather, Gorgias, let me turn to you, and ask the same question what
are we to call you, and what is the art which you profess?
  Gor. Rhetoric, Socrates, is my art.
  Soc. Then I am to call you a rhetorician?
  Gor. Yes, Socrates, and a good one too, if you would call me that
which, in Homeric language, "I boast myself to be."
  Soc. I should wish to do so.
  Gor. Then pray do.
  Soc. And are we to say that you are able to make other men
rhetoricians?
  Gor. Yes, that is exactly what I profess to make them, not only at
Athens, but in all places.
  Soc. And will you continue to ask and answer questions, Gorgias,
as we are at present doing and reserve for another occasion the longer
mode of speech which Polus was attempting? Will you keep your promise,
and answer shortly the questions which are asked of you?
  Gor. Some answers, Socrates, are of necessity longer; but I will
do my best to make them as short as possible; for a part of my
profession is that I can be as short as any one.
  Soc. That is what is wanted, Gorgias; exhibit the shorter method
now, and the longer one at some other time.
  Gor. Well, I will; and you will certainly say, that you never
heard a man use fewer words.
  Soc. Very good then; as you profess to be a rhetorician, and a maker
of rhetoricians, let me ask you, with what is rhetoric concerned: I
might ask with what is weaving concerned, and you would reply (would
you not?), with the making of garments?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And music is concerned with the composition of melodies?
  Gor. It is.
  Soc. By Here, Gorgias, I admire the surpassing brevity of your
answers.
  Gor. Yes, Socrates, I do think myself good at that.
  Soc. I am glad to hear it; answer me in like manner about
rhetoric: with what is rhetoric concerned?
  Gor. With discourse.
  Soc. What sort of discourse, Gorgias?-such discourse as would
teach the sick under what treatment they might get well?
  Gor. No.
  Soc. Then rhetoric does not treat of all kinds of discourse?
  Gor. Certainly not.
  Soc. And yet rhetoric makes men able to speak?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And to understand that about which they speak?
  Gor. Of course.
  Soc. But does not the art of medicine, which we were just now
mentioning, also make men able to understand and speak about the sick?
  Gor. Certainly.
  Soc. Then medicine also treats of discourse?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. Of discourse concerning diseases?
  Gor. Just so.
  Soc. And does not gymnastic also treat of discourse concerning the
good or evil condition of the body?
  Gor. Very true.
  Soc. And the same, Gorgias, is true of the other arts:-all of them
treat of discourse concerning the subjects with which they severally
have to do.
  Gor. Clearly.
  Soc. Then why, if you call rhetoric the art which treats of
discourse, and all the other arts treat of discourse, do you not
call them arts of rhetoric?
  Gor. Because, Socrates, the knowledge of the other arts has only
to do with some sort of external action, as of the hand; but there
is no such action of the hand in rhetoric which works and takes effect
only through the medium of discourse. And therefore I am justified
in saying that rhetoric treats of discourse.
  Soc. I am not sure whether I entirely understand you, but I dare say
I shall soon know better; please to answer me a question:-you would
allow that there are arts?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. As to the arts generally, they are for the most part
concerned with doing, and require little or no speaking; in
painting, and statuary, and many other arts, the work may proceed in
silence; and of such arts I suppose you would say that they do not
come within the province of rhetoric.
  Gor. You perfectly conceive my meaning, Socrates.
  Soc. But there are other arts which work wholly through the medium
of language, and require either no action or very little, as, for
example, the arts of arithmetic, of calculation, of geometry, and of
playing draughts; in some of these speech is pretty nearly
co-extensive with action, but in most of them the verbal element is
greater-they depend wholly on words for their efficacy and power:
and I take your meaning to be that rhetoric is an art of this latter
sort?
  Gor. Exactly.
  Soc. And yet I do not believe that you really mean to call any of
these arts rhetoric; although the precise expression which you used
was, that rhetoric is an art which works and takes effect only through
the medium of discourse; and an adversary who wished to be captious
might say, "And so, Gorgias, you call arithmetic rhetoric." But I do
not think that you really call arithmetic rhetoric any more than
geometry would be so called by you.
  Gor. You are quite right, Socrates, in your apprehension of my
meaning.
  Soc. Well, then, let me now have the rest of my answer:-seeing
that rhetoric is one of those arts which works mainly by the use of
words, and there are other arts which also use words, tell me what
is that quality in words with which rhetoric is concerned:-Suppose
that a person asks me about some of the arts which I was mentioning
just now; he might say, "Socrates, what is arithmetic?" and I should
reply to him, as you replied to me, that arithmetic is one of those
arts which take effect through words. And then he would proceed to
ask: "Words about what?" and I should reply, Words about and even
numbers, and how many there are of each. And if he asked again:
"What is the art of calculation?" I should say, That also is one of
the arts which is concerned wholly with words. And if he further said,
"Concerned with what?" I should say, like the clerks in the
assembly, "as aforesaid" of arithmetic, but with a difference, the
difference being that the art of calculation considers not only the
quantities of odd and even numbers, but also their numerical relations
to themselves and to one another. And suppose, again, I were to say
that astronomy is only word-he would ask, "Words about what,
Socrates?" and I should answer, that astronomy tells us about the
motions of the stars and sun and moon, and their relative swiftness.
  Gor. You would be quite right, Socrates.
  Soc. And now let us have from you, Gorgias, the truth about
rhetoric: which you would admit (would you not?) to be one of those
arts which act always and fulfil all their ends through the medium
of words?
  Gor. True.
  Soc. Words which do what? I should ask. To what class of things do
the words which rhetoric uses relate?
  Gor. To the greatest, Socrates, and the best of human things.
  Soc. That again, Gorgias is ambiguous; I am still in the dark: for
which are the greatest and best of human things? I dare say that you
have heard men singing at feasts the old drinking song, in which the
singers enumerate the goods of life, first health, beauty next,
thirdly, as the writer of the song says, wealth honesty obtained.
  Gor. Yes, I know the song; but what is your drift?
  Soc. I mean to say, that the producers of those things which the
author of the song praises, that is to say, the physician, the
trainer, the money-maker, will at once come to you, and first the
physician will say: "O Socrates, Gorgias is deceiving you, for my
art is concerned with the greatest good of men and not his." And
when I ask, Who are you? he will reply, "I am a physician." What do
you mean? I shall say. Do you mean that your art produces the greatest
good? "Certainly," he will answer, "for is not health the greatest
good? What greater good can men have, Socrates?" And after him the
trainer will come and say, "I too, Socrates, shall be greatly
surprised if Gorgias can show more good of his art than I can show
of mine." To him again I shall say, Who are you, honest friend, and
what is your business? "I am a trainer," he will reply, "and my
business is to make men beautiful and strong in body." When I have
done with the trainer, there arrives the money-maker, and he, as I
expect, utterly despise them all. "Consider Socrates," he will say,
"whether Gorgias or any one-else can produce any greater good than
wealth." Well, you and I say to him, and are you a creator of
wealth? "Yes," he replies. And who are you? "A money-maker." And do
you consider wealth to be the greatest good of man? "Of course,"
will be his reply. And we shall rejoin: Yes; but our friend Gorgias
contends that his art produces a greater good than yours. And then
he will be sure to go on and ask, "What good? Let Gorgias answer." Now
I want you, Gorgias, to imagine that this question is asked of you
by them and by me; What is that which, as you say, is the greatest
good of man, and of which you are the creator? Answer us.
  Gor. That good, Socrates, which is truly the greatest, being that
which gives to men freedom in their own persons, and to individuals
the power of ruling over others in their several states.
  Soc. And what would you consider this to be?
  Gor. What is there greater than the word which persuades the
judges in the courts, or the senators in the council, or the
citizens in the assembly, or at any other political meeting?-if you
have the power of uttering this word, you will have the physician your
slave, and the trainer your slave, and the money-maker of whom you
talk will be found to gather treasures, not for himself, but for you
who are able to speak and to persuade the multitude.
  Soc. Now I think, Gorgias, that you have very accurately explained
what you conceive to be the art of rhetoric; and you mean to say, if I
am not mistaken, that rhetoric is the artificer of persuasion,
having this and no other business, and that this is her crown and end.
Do you know any other effect of rhetoric over and above that of
producing persuasion?
  Gor. No: the definition seems to me very fair, Socrates; for
persuasion is the chief end of rhetoric.
  Soc. Then hear me, Gorgias, for I am quite sure that if there ever
was a man who-entered on the discussion of a matter from a pure love
of knowing the truth, I am such a one, and I should say the same of
you.
  Gor. What is coming, Socrates?
  Soc. I will tell you: I am very well aware that do not know what,
according to you, is the exact nature, or what are the topics of
that persuasion of which you speak, and which is given by rhetoric;
although I have a suspicion about both the one and the other. And I am
going to ask-what is this power of persuasion which is given by
rhetoric, and about what? But why, if I have a suspicion, do I ask
instead of telling you? Not for your sake, but in order that the
argument may proceed in such a manner as is most likely to set forth
the truth. And I would have you observe, that I am right in asking
this further question: If I asked, "What sort of a painter is Zeuxis?"
and you said, "The painter of figures," should I not be right in
asking, What kind of figures, and where do you find them?"
  Gor. Certainly.
  Soc. And the reason for asking this second question would be, that
there are other painters besides, who paint many other figures?
  Gor. True.
  Soc. But if there had been no one but Zeuxis who painted them,
then you would have answered very well?
  Gor. Quite so.
  Soc. Now I was it to know about rhetoric in the same way;-is
rhetoric the only art which brings persuasion, or do other arts have
the same effect? I mean to say-Does he who teaches anything persuade
men of that which he teaches or not?
  Gor. He persuades, Socrates,-there can be no mistake about that.
  Soc. Again, if we take the arts of which we were just now
speaking:-do not arithmetic and the arithmeticians teach us the
properties of number?
  Gor. Certainly.
  Soc. And therefore persuade us of them?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. Then arithmetic as well as rhetoric is an artificer of
persuasion?
  Gor. Clearly.
  Soc. And if any one asks us what sort of persuasion, and about
what,-we shall answer, persuasion which teaches the quantity of odd
and even; and we shall be able to show that all the other arts of
which we were just now speaking are artificers of persuasion, and of
what sort, and about what.
  Gor. Very true.
  Soc. Then rhetoric is not the only artificer of persuasion?
  Gor. True.
  Soc. Seeing, then, that not only rhetoric works by persuasion, but
that other arts do the same, as in the case of the painter, a question
has arisen which is a very fair one: Of what persuasion is rhetoric
the artificer, and about what?-is not that a fair way of putting the
question?
  Gor. I think so.
  Soc. Then, if you approve the question, Gorgias, what is the answer?
  Gor. I answer, Socrates, that rhetoric is the art of persuasion in
courts of law and other assemblies, as I was just now saying, and
about the just and unjust.
  Soc. And that, Gorgias, was what I was suspecting to be your notion;
yet I would not have you wonder if by-and-by I am found repeating a
seemingly plain question; for I ask not in order to confute you, but
as I was saying that the argument may proceed consecutively, and
that we may not get the habit of anticipating and suspecting the
meaning of one another's words; I would have you develop your own
views in your own way, whatever may be your hypothesis.
  Gor. I think that you are quite right, Socrates.
  Soc. Then let me raise another question; there is such a thing as
"having learned"?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And there is also "having believed"?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And is the "having learned" the same "having believed," and are
learning and belief the same things?
  Gor. In my judgment, Socrates, they are not the same.
  Soc. And your judgment is right, as you may ascertain in this
way:-If a person were to say to you, "Is there, Gorgias, a false
belief as well as a true?" -you would reply, if I am not mistaken,
that there is.
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. Well, but is there a false knowledge as well as a true?
  Gor. No.
  Soc. No, indeed; and this again proves that knowledge and belief
differ.
  Gor. Very true.
  Soc. And yet those who have learned as well as those who have
believed are persuaded?
  Gor. Just so.
  Soc. Shall we then assume two sorts of persuasion,-one which is
the source of belief without knowledge, as the other is of knowledge?
  Gor. By all means.
  Soc. And which sort of persuasion does rhetoric create in courts
of law and other assemblies about the just and unjust, the sort of
persuasion which gives belief without knowledge, or that which gives
knowledge?
  Gor. Clearly, Socrates, that which only gives belief.
  Soc. Then rhetoric, as would appear, is the artificer of a
persuasion which creates belief about the just and unjust, but gives
no instruction about them?
  Gor. True.
  Soc. And the rhetorician does not instruct the courts of law or
other assemblies about things just and unjust, but he creates belief
about them; for no one can be supposed to instruct such a vast
multitude about such high matters in a short time?
  Gor. Certainly not.
  Soc. Come, then, and let us see what we really mean about
rhetoric; for I do not know what my own meaning is as yet. When the
assembly meets to elect a physician or a shipwright or any other
craftsman, will the rhetorician be taken into counsel? Surely not. For
at every election he ought to be chosen who is most skilled; and,
again, when walls have to be built or harbours or docks to be
constructed, not the rhetorician but the master workman will advise;
or when generals have to be chosen and an order of battle arranged, or
a proposition taken, then the military will advise and not the
rhetoricians: what do you say, Gorgias? Since you profess to be a
rhetorician and a maker of rhetoricians, I cannot do better than learn
the nature of your art from you. And here let me assure you that I
have your interest in view as well as my own. For likely enough some
one or other of the young men present might desire to become your
pupil, and in fact I see some, and a good many too, who have this
wish, but they would be too modest to question you. And therefore when
you are interrogated by me, I would have you imagine that you are
interrogated by them. "What is the use of coming to you, Gorgias? they
will say about what will you teach us to advise the state?-about the
just and unjust only, or about those other things also which
Socrates has just mentioned? How will you answer them?
  Gor. I like your way of leading us on, Socrates, and I will
endeavour to reveal to you the whole nature of rhetoric. You must have
heard, I think, that the docks and the walls of the Athenians and
the plan of the harbour were devised in accordance with the
counsels, partly of Themistocles, and partly of Pericles, and not at
the suggestion of the builders.
  Soc. Such is the tradition, Gorgias, about Themistocles; and I
myself heard the speech of Pericles when he advised us about the
middle wall.
  Gor. And you will observe, Socrates, that when a decision has to
be given in such matters the rhetoricians are the advisers; they are
the men who win their point.
  Soc. I had that in my admiring mind, Gorgias, when I asked what is
the nature of rhetoric, which always appears to me, when I look at the
matter in this way, to be a marvel of greatness.
  Gor. A marvel, indeed, Socrates, if you only knew how rhetoric
comprehends and holds under her sway all the inferior arts. Let me
offer you a striking example of this. On several occasions I have been
with my brother Herodicus or some other physician to see one of his
patients, who would not allow the physician to give him medicine, or
apply a knife or hot iron to him; and I have persuaded him to do for
me what he would not do for the physician just by the use of rhetoric.
And I say that if a rhetorician and a physician were to go to any
city, and had there to argue in the Ecclesia or any other assembly
as to which of them should be elected state-physician, the physician
would have no chance; but he who could speak would be chosen if he
wished; and in a contest with a man of any other profession the
rhetorician more than any one would have the power of getting
himself chosen, for he can speak more persuasively to the multitude
than any of them, and on any subject. Such is the nature and power
of the art of rhetoric And yet, Socrates, rhetoric should be used like
any other competitive art, not against everybody-the rhetorician ought
not to abuse his strength any more than a pugilist or pancratiast or
other master of fence; because he has powers which are more than a
match either for friend or enemy, he ought not therefore to strike,
stab, or slay his friends. Suppose a man to have been trained in the
palestra and to be a skilful boxer-he in the fulness of his strength
goes and strikes his father or mother or one of his familiars or
friends; but that is no reason why the trainers or fencing-masters
should be held in detestation or banished from the city-surely not.
For they taught their art for a good purpose, to be used against
enemies and evil-doers, in self-defence not in aggression, and
others have perverted their instructions, and turned to a bad use
their own strength and skill. But not on this account are the teachers
bad, neither is the art in fault, or bad in itself; I should rather
say that those who make a bad use of the art are to blame. And the
same argument holds good of rhetoric; for the rhetorician can speak
against all men and upon any subject-in short, he can persuade the
multitude better than any other man of anything which he pleases,
but he should not therefore seek to defraud the physician or any other
artist of his reputation merely because he has the power; he ought
to use rhetoric fairly, as he would also use his athletic powers.
And if after having become a rhetorician he makes a bad use of his
strength and skill, his instructor surely ought not on that account to
be held in detestation or banished. For he was intended by his teacher
to make a good use of his instructions, but he abuses them. And
therefore he is the person who ought to be held in detestation,
banished, and put to death, and not his instructor.
  Soc. You, Gorgias, like myself, have had great experience of
disputations, and you must have observed, I think, that they do not
always terminate in mutual edification, or in the definition by either
party of the subjects which they are discussing; but disagreements are
apt to arise-somebody says that another has not spoken truly or
clearly; and then they get into a passion and begin to quarrel, both
parties conceiving that their opponents are arguing from personal
feeling only and jealousy of themselves, not from any interest in
the question at issue. And sometimes they will go on abusing one
another until the company at last are quite vexed at themselves for
ever listening to such fellows. Why do I say this? Why, because I
cannot help feeling that you are now saying what is not quite
consistent or accordant with what you were saying at first about
rhetoric. And I am afraid to point this out to you, lest you should
think that I have some animosity against you, and that I speak, not
for the sake of discovering the truth, but from jealousy of you. Now
if you are one of my sort, I should like to cross-examine you, but
if not I will let you alone. And what is my sort? you will ask. I am
one of those who are very willing to be refuted if I say anything
which is not true, and very willing to refute any one else who says
what is not true, and quite as ready to be refuted as to refute-I
for I hold that this is the greater gain of the two, just as the
gain is greater of being cured of a very great evil than of curing
another. For I imagine that there is no evil which a man can endure so
great as an erroneous opinion about the matters of which we are
speaking and if you claim to be one of my sort, let us have the
discussion out, but if you would rather have done, no matter-let us
make an end of it.
  Gor. I should say, Socrates, that I am quite the man whom you
indicate; but, perhaps, we ought to consider the audience, for, before
you came, I had already given a long exhibition, and if we proceed the
argument may run on to a great length. And therefore I think that we
should consider whether we, may not be detaining some part of the
company when they are wanting to do something else.
  Chaer. You hear the audience cheering, Gorgias and Socrates, which
shows their desire to listen to you; and for myself, Heaven forbid
that I should have any business on hand which would take me Away
from a discussion so interesting and so ably maintained.
  Cal. By the gods, Chaerephon, although I have been present at many
discussions, I doubt whether I was ever so much delighted before,
and therefore if you go on discoursing all day I shall be the better
pleased.
  Soc. I may truly say, Callicles, that I am willing, if Gorgias is.
  Gor. After all this, Socrates, I should be disgraced if I refused,
especially as I have promised to answer all comers; in accordance with
the wishes of the company, them, do you begin. and ask of me any
question which you like.
  Soc. Let me tell you then, Gorgias, what surprises me in your words;
though I dare say that you may be right, and I may have understood
your meaning. You say that you can make any man, who will learn of
you, a rhetorician?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. Do you mean that you will teach him to gain the ears of the
multitude on any subject, and this not by instruction but by
persuasion?
  Gor. Quite so.
  Soc. You were saying, in fact, that the rhetorician will have,
greater powers of persuasion than the physician even in a matter of
health?
  Gor. Yes, with the multitude-that is.
  Soc. You mean to say, with the ignorant; for with those who know
he cannot be supposed to have greater powers of persuasion.
  Gor. Very true.
  Soc. But if he is to have more power of persuasion than the
physician, he will have greater power than he who knows?
  Gor. Certainly.
  Soc. Although he is not a physician:-is he?
  Gor. No.
  Soc. And he who is not a physician must, obviously, be ignorant of
what the physician knows.
  Gor. Clearly.
  Soc. Then, when the rhetorician is more persuasive than the
physician, the ignorant is more persuasive with the ignorant than he
who has knowledge?-is not that the inference?
  Gor. In the case supposed:-Yes.
  Soc. And the same holds of the relation of rhetoric to all the other
arts; the rhetorician need not know the truth about things; he has
only to discover some way of persuading the ignorant that he has
more knowledge than those who know?
  Gor. Yes, Socrates, and is not this a great comfort?-not to have
learned the other arts, but the art of rhetoric only, and yet to be in
no way inferior to the professors of them?
  Soc. Whether the rhetorician is or not inferior on this account is a
question which we will hereafter examine if the enquiry is likely to
be of any service to us; but I would rather begin by asking, whether
he is as ignorant of the just and unjust, base and honourable, good
and evil, as he is of medicine and the other arts; I mean to say, does
he really know anything of what is good and evil, base or
honourable, just or unjust in them; or has he only a way with the
ignorant of persuading them that he not knowing is to be esteemed to
know more about these things than some. one else who knows? Or must
the pupil know these things and come to you knowing them before he can
acquire the art of rhetoric? If he is ignorant, you who are the
teacher of rhetoric will not teach him-it is not your business; but
you will make him seem to the multitude to know them, when he does not
know them; and seem to be a good man, when he is not. Or will you be
unable to teach him rhetoric at all, unless he knows the truth of
these things first? What is to be said about all this? By heavens,
Gorgias, I wish that you would reveal to me the power of rhetoric,
as you were saying that you would.
  Gor. Well, Socrates, I suppose that if the pupil does chance not
to know them, he will have to learn of me these things as well.
  Soc. Say no more, for there you are right; and so he whom you make a
rhetorician must either know the nature of the just and unjust
already, or he must be taught by you.
  Gor. Certainly.
  Soc. Well, and is not he who has learned carpentering a carpenter?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And he who has learned music a musician?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And he who has learned medicine is a physician, in like manner?
He who has learned anything whatever is that which his knowledge makes
him.
  Gor. Certainly.
  Soc. And in the same way, he who has learned what is just is just?
  Gor. To be sure.
  Soc. And he who is just may be supposed to do what is just?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And must not the just man always desire to do what is just?
  Gor. That is clearly the inference.
  Soc. Surely, then, the just man will never consent to do injustice?
  Gor. Certainly not.
  Soc. And according to the argument the rhetorician must be a just
man?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. And will therefore never be willing to do injustice?
  Gor. Clearly not.
  Soc. But do you remember saying just now that the trainer is not
to be accused or banished if the pugilist makes a wrong use of his
pugilistic art; and in like manner, if the rhetorician makes a bad and
unjust use of rhetoric, that is not to be laid to the charge of his
teacher, who is not to be banished, but the wrong-doer himself who
made a bad use of his rhetoric-he is to be banished-was not that said?
  Gor. Yes, it was.
  Soc. But now we are affirming that the aforesaid rhetorician will
never have done injustice at all?
  Gor. True.
  Soc. And at the very outset, Gorgias, it was said that rhetoric
treated of discourse, not [like arithmetic] about odd and even, but
about just and unjust? Was not this said?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. I was thinking at the time, when I heard you saying so, that
rhetoric, which is always discoursing about justice, could not
possibly be an unjust thing. But when you added, shortly afterwards,
that the rhetorician might make a bad use of rhetoric I noted with
surprise the inconsistency into which you had fallen; and I said, that
if you thought, as I did, that there was a gain in being refuted,
there would be an advantage in going on with the question, but if not,
I would leave off. And in the course of our investigations, as you
will see yourself, the rhetorician has been acknowledged to be
incapable of making an unjust use of rhetoric, or of willingness to do
injustice. By the dog, Gorgias, there will be a great deal of
discussion, before we get at the truth of all this.
  Polus. And do even you, Socrates, seriously believe what you are now
saying about rhetoric? What! because Gorgias was ashamed to deny
that the rhetorician knew the just and the honourable and the good,
and admitted that to any one who came to him ignorant of them he could
teach them, and then out of this admission there arose a
contradiction-the thing which you dearly love, and to which not he,
but you, brought the argument by your captious questions-[do you
seriously believe that there is any truth in all this?] For will any
one ever acknowledge that he does not know, or cannot teach, the
nature of justice? The truth is, that there is great want of manners
in bringing the argument to such a pass.
  Soc. Illustrious Polus, the reason why we provide ourselves with
friends and children is, that when we get old and stumble, a younger
generation may be at hand to set us on our legs again in our words and
in our actions: and now, if I and Gorgias are stumbling, here are
you who should raise us up; and I for my part engage to retract any
error into which you may think that I have fallen-upon one condition:
  Pol. What condition?
  Soc. That you contract, Polus, the prolixity of speech in which
you indulged at first.
  Pol. What! do you mean that I may not use as many words as I please?
  Soc. Only to think, my friend, that having come on a visit to
Athens, which is the most free-spoken state in Hellas, you when you
got there, and you alone, should be deprived of the power of
speech-that would be hard indeed. But then consider my case:-shall not
I be very hardly used, if, when you are making a long oration, and
refusing to answer what you are asked, I am compelled to stay and
listen to you, and may not go away? I say rather, if you have a real
interest in the argument, or, to repeat my former expression, have any
desire to set it on its legs, take back any statement which you
please; and in your turn ask and answer, like myself and
Gorgias-refute and be refuted: for I suppose that you would claim to
know what Gorgias knows-would you not?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And you, like him, invite any one to ask you about anything
which he pleases, and you will know how to answer him?
  Pol. To be sure.
  Soc. And now, which will you do, ask or answer?
  Pol. I will ask; and do you answer me, Socrates, the same question
which Gorgias, as you suppose, is unable to answer: What is rhetoric?
  Soc. Do you mean what sort of an art?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. To say the truth, Polus, it is not an art at all, in my
opinion.
  Pol. Then what, in your opinion, is rhetoric?
  Soc. A thing which, as I was lately reading in a book of yours,
you say that you have made an art.
  Pol. What thing?
  Soc. I should say a sort of experience.
  Pol. Does rhetoric seem to you to be an experience?
  Soc. That is my view, but you may be of another mind.
  Pol. An experience in what?
  Soc. An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification.
  Pol. And if able to gratify others, must not rhetoric be a fine
thing?
  Soc. What are you saying, Polus? Why do you ask me whether
rhetoric is a fine thing or not, when I have not as yet told you
what rhetoric is?
  Pol. Did I not hear you say that rhetoric was a sort of experience?
  Soc. Will you, who are so desirous to gratify others, afford a
slight gratification to me?
  Pol. I will.
  Soc. Will you ask me, what sort of an art is cookery?
  Pol. What sort of an art is cookery?
  Soc. Not an art at all, Polus.
  Pol. What then?
  Soc. I should say an experience.
  Pol. In what? I wish that you would explain to me.
  Soc. An experience in producing a sort of delight and gratification,
Polus.
  Pol. Then are cookery and rhetoric the same?
  Soc. No, they are only different parts of the same profession.
  Pol. Of what profession?
  Soc. I am afraid that the truth may seem discourteous; and I
hesitate to answer, lest Gorgias should imagine that I am making fun
of his own profession. For whether or no this is that art of
rhetoric which Gorgias practises I really cannot tell:-from what he
was just now saying, nothing appeared of what he thought of his art,
but the rhetoric which I mean is a part of a not very creditable
whole.
  Gor. A part of what, Socrates? Say what you mean, and never mind me.
  Soc. In my opinion then, Gorgias, the whole of which rhetoric is a
part is not an art at all, but the habit of a bold and ready wit,
which knows how to manage mankind: this habit I sum up under the
word "flattery"; and it appears to me to have many other parts, one of
which is cookery, which may seem to be an art, but, as I maintain,
is only an experience or routine and not an art:-another part is
rhetoric, and the art of attiring and sophistry are two others: thus
there are four branches, and four different things answering to
them. And Polus may ask, if he likes, for he has not as yet been
informed, what part of flattery is rhetoric: he did not see that I had
not yet answered him when he proceeded to ask a further question:
Whether I do not think rhetoric a fine thing? But I shall not tell him
whether rhetoric is a fine thing or not, until I have first
answered, "What is rhetoric?" For that would not be right, Polus;
but I shall be happy to answer, if you will ask me, What part of
flattery is rhetoric?
  Pol. I will ask and do you answer? What part of flattery is
rhetoric?
  Soc. Will you understand my answer? Rhetoric, according to my
view, is the ghost or counterfeit of a part of politics.
  Pol. And noble or ignoble?
  Soc. Ignoble, I should say, if I am compelled to answer, for I
call what is bad ignoble: though I doubt whether you understand what I
was saying before.
  Gor. Indeed, Socrates, I cannot say that I understand myself.
  Soc. I do not wonder, Gorgias; for I have not as yet explained
myself, and our friend Polus, colt by name and colt by nature, is
apt to run away.
  Gor. Never mind him, but explain to me what you mean by saying
that rhetoric is the counterfeit of a part of politics.
  Soc. I will try, then, to explain my notion of rhetoric, and if I am
mistaken, my friend Polus shall refute me. We may assume the existence
of bodies and of souls?
  Gor. Of course.
  Soc. You would further admit that there is a good condition of
either of them?
  Gor. Yes.
  Soc. Which condition may not be really good, but good only in
appearance? I mean to say, that there are many persons who appear to
be in good health, and whom only a physician or trainer will discern
at first sight not to be in good health.
  Gor. True.
  Soc. And this applies not only to the body, but also to the soul: in
either there may be that which gives the appearance of health and
not the reality?
  Gor. Yes, certainly.
  Soc. And now I will endeavour to explain to you more clearly what
I mean: The soul and body being two, have two arts corresponding to
them: there is the art of politics attending on the soul; and
another art attending on the body, of which I know no single name, but
which may be described as having two divisions, one of them gymnastic,
and the other medicine. And in politics there is a legislative part,
which answers to gymnastic, as justice does to medicine; and the two
parts run into one another, justice having to do with the same subject
as legislation, and medicine with the same subject as gymnastic, but
with a difference. Now, seeing that there are these four arts, two
attending on the body and two on the soul for their highest good;
flattery knowing, or rather guessing their natures, has distributed
herself into four shams or simulations of them; she puts on the
likeness of some one or other of them, and pretends to be that which
she simulates, and having no regard for men's highest interests, is
ever making pleasure the bait of the unwary, and deceiving them into
the belief that she is of the highest value to them. Cookery simulates
the disguise of medicine, and pretends to know what food is the best
for the body; and if the physician and the cook had to enter into a
competition in which children were the judges, or men who had no
more sense than children, as to which of them best understands the
goodness or badness of food, the physician would be starved to
death. A flattery I deem this to be and of an ignoble sort, Polus, for
to you I am now addressing myself, because it aims at pleasure without
any thought of the best. An art I do not call it, but only an
experience, because it is unable to explain or to give a reason of the
nature of its own applications. And I do not call any irrational thing
an art; but if you dispute my words, I am prepared to argue in defence
of them.
  Cookery, then, I maintain to be a flattery which takes the form of
medicine; and tiring, in like manner, is a flattery which takes the
form of gymnastic, and is knavish, false, ignoble, illiberal,
working deceitfully by the help of lines, and colours, and enamels,
and garments, and making men affect a spurious beauty to the neglect
of the true beauty which is given by gymnastic.
  I would rather not be tedious, and therefore I will only say,
after the manner of the geometricians (for I think that by this time
you will be able to follow)

    astiring : gymnastic :: cookery : medicine;
or rather,
    astiring : gymnastic :: sophistry : legislation;
and
    as cookery : medicine :: rhetoric : justice.

And this, I say, is the natural difference between the rhetorician and
the sophist, but by reason of their near connection, they are apt to
be jumbled up together; neither do they know what to make of
themselves, nor do other men know what to make of them. For if the
body presided over itself, and were not under the guidance of the
soul, and the soul did not discern and discriminate between cookery
and medicine, but the body was made the judge of them, and the rule of
judgment was the bodily delight which was given by them, then the word
of Anaxagoras, that word with which you, friend Polus, are so well
acquainted, would prevail far and wide: "Chaos" would come again,
and cookery, health, and medicine would mingle in an indiscriminate
mass. And now I have told you my notion of rhetoric, which is, in
relation to the soul, what cookery is to the body. I may have been
inconsistent in making a long speech, when I would not allow you to
discourse at length. But I think that I may be excused, because you
did not understand me, and could make no use of my answer when I spoke
shortly, and therefore I had to enter into explanation. And if I
show an equal inability to make use of yours, I hope that you will
speak at equal length; but if I am able to understand you, let me have
the benefit of your brevity, as is only fair: And now you may do
what you please with my answer.
  Pol. What do you mean? do you think that rhetoric is flattery?
  Soc. Nay, I said a part of flattery-if at your age, Polus, you
cannot remember, what will you do by-and-by, when you get older?
  Pol. And are the good rhetoricians meanly regarded in states,
under the idea that they are flatterers?
  Soc. Is that a question or the beginning of a speech?
  Pol. I am asking a question.
  Soc. Then my answer is, that they are not regarded at all.
  Pol. How not regarded? Have they not very great power in states?
  Soc. Not if you mean to say that power is a good to the possessor.
  Pol. And that is what I do mean to say.
  Soc. Then, if so, I think that they have the least power of all
the citizens.
  Pol. What! Are they not like tyrants? They kill and despoil and
exile any one whom they please.
  Soc. By the dog, Polus, I cannot make out at each deliverance of
yours, whether you are giving an opinion of your own, or asking a
question of me.
  Pol. I am asking a question of you.
  Soc. Yes, my friend, but you ask two questions at once.
  Pol. How two questions?
  Soc. Why, did you not say just now that the rhetoricians are like
tyrants, and that they kill and despoil or exile any one whom they
please?
  Pol. I did.
  Soc. Well then, I say to you that here are two questions in one, and
I will answer both of them. And I tell you, Polus, that rhetoricians
and tyrants have the least possible power in states, as I was just now
saying; for they do literally nothing which they will, but only what
they think best.
  Pol. And is not that a great power?
  Soc. Polus has already said the reverse.
  Soc. No, by the great-what do you call him?-not you, for you say
that power is a good to him who has the power.
  Pol. I do.
  Soc. And would you maintain that if a fool does what he think
best, this is a good, and would you call this great power?
  Pol. I should not.
  Soc. Then you must prove that the rhetorician is not a fool, and
that rhetoric is an art and not a flattery-and so you will have
refuted me; but if you leave me unrefuted, why, the rhetoricians who
do what they think best in states, and the tyrants, will have
nothing upon which to congratulate themselves, if as you say, power be
indeed a good, admitting at the same time that what is done without
sense is an evil.
  Pol. Yes; I admit that.
  Soc. How then can the rhetoricians or the tyrants have great power
in states, unless Polus can refute Socrates, and prove to him that
they do as they will?
  Pol. This fellow-
  Soc. I say that they do not do as they will-now refute me.
  Pol. Why, have you not already said that they do as they think best?
  Soc. And I say so still.
  Pol. Then surely they do as they will?
  Soc. I deny it.
  Pol. But they do what they think best?
  Soc. Aye.
  Pol. That, Socrates, is monstrous and absurd.
  Soc. Good words, good Polus, as I may say in your own peculiar
style; but if you have any questions to ask of me, either prove that I
am in error or give the answer yourself.
  Pol. Very well, I am willing to answer that I may know what you
mean.
  Soc. Do men appear to you to will that which they do, or to will
that further end for the sake of which they do a thing? when they take
medicine, for example, at the bidding of a physician, do they will the
drinking of the medicine which is painful, or the health for the
sake of which they drink?
  Pol. Clearly, the health.
  Soc. And when men go on a voyage or engage in business, they do
not will that which they are doing at the time; for who would desire
to take the risk of a voyage or the trouble of business?-But they
will, to have the wealth for the sake of which they go on a voyage.
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And is not this universally true? If a man does something for
the sake of something else, he wills not that which he does, but
that for the sake of which he does it.
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And are not all things either good or evil, or intermediate and
indifferent?
  Pol. To be sure, Socrates.
  Soc. Wisdom and health and wealth and the like you would call goods,
and their opposites evils?
  Pol. I should.
  Soc. And the things which are neither good nor evil, and which
partake sometimes of the nature of good and at other times of evil, or
of neither, are such as sitting, walking, running, sailing; or, again,
wood, stones, and the like:-these are the things which you call
neither good nor evil?
  Pol. Exactly so.
  Soc. Are these indifferent things done for the sake of the good,
or the good for the sake of the indifferent?
  Pol. Clearly, the indifferent for the sake of the good.
  Soc. When we walk we walk for the sake of the good, and under the
idea that it is better to walk, and when we stand we stand equally for
the sake of the good?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And when we kill a man we kill him or exile him or despoil
him of his goods, because, as we think, it will conduce to our good?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. Men who do any of these things do them for the sake of the
good?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And did we not admit that in doing something for the sake of
something else, we do not will those things which we do, but that
other thing for the sake of which we do them?
  Pol. Most true.
  Soc. Then we do not will simply to kill a man or to exile him or
to despoil him of his goods, but we will to do that which conduces
to our good, and if the act is not conducive to our good we do not
will it; for we will, as you say, that which is our good, but that
which is neither good nor evil, or simply evil, we do not will. Why
are you silent, Polus? Am I not right?
  Pol. You are right.
  Soc. Hence we may infer, that if any one, whether he be a tyrant
or a rhetorician, kills another or exiles another or deprives him of
his property, under the idea that the act is for his own interests
when really not for his own interests, he may be said to do what seems
best to him?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. But does he do what he wills if he does what is evil? Why do
you not answer?
  Pol. Well, I suppose not.
  Soc. Then if great power is a good as you allow, will such a one
have great power in a state?
  Pol. He will not.
  Soc. Then I was right in saying that a man may do what seems good to
him in a state, and not have great power, and not do what he wills?
  Pol. As though you, Socrates, would not like to have the power of
doing what seemed good to you in the state, rather than not; you would
not be jealous when you saw any one killing or despoiling or
imprisoning whom he pleased, Oh, no!
  Soc. Justly or unjustly, do you mean?
  Pol. In either case is he not equally to be envied?
  Soc. Forbear, Polus!
  Pol. Why "forbear"?
  Soc. Because you ought not to envy wretches who are not to be
envied, but only to pity them.
  Pol. And are those of whom spoke wretches?
  Soc. Yes, certainly they are.
  Pol. And so you think that he who slays any one whom he pleases, and
justly slays him, is pitiable and wretched?
  Soc. No, I do not say that of him: but neither do I think that he is
to be envied.
  Pol. Were you not saying just now that he is wretched?
  Soc. Yes, my friend, if he killed another unjustly, in which case he
is also to be pitied; and he is not to be envied if he killed him
justly.
  Pol. At any rate you will allow that he who is unjustly put to death
is wretched, and to be pitied?
  Soc. Not so much, Polus, as he who kills him, and not so much as
he who is justly killed.
  Pol. How can that be, Socrates?
  Soc. That may very well be, inasmuch as doing injustice is the
greatest of evils.
  Pol. But is it the greatest? Is not suffering injustice a greater
evil?
  Soc. Certainly not.
  Pol. Then would you rather suffer than do injustice?
  Soc. I should not like either, but if I must choose between them,
I would rather suffer than do.
  Pol. Then you would not wish to be a tyrant?
  Soc. Not if you mean by tyranny what I mean.
  Pol. I mean, as I said before, the power of doing whatever seems
good to you in a state, killing, banishing, doing in all things as you
like.
  Soc. Well then, illustrious friend, when I have said my say, do
you reply to me. Suppose that I go into a crowded Agora, and take a
dagger under my arm. Polus, I say to you, I have just acquired rare
power, and become a tyrant; for if I think that any of these men
whom you see ought to be put to death, the man whom I have a mind to
kill is as good as dead; and if I am disposed to break his head or
tear his garment, he will have his head broken or his garment torn
in an instant. Such is my great power in this city. And if you do
not believe me, and I show you the dagger, you would probably reply:
Socrates, in that sort of way any one may have great power-he may burn
any house which he pleases, and the docks and triremes of the
Athenians, and all their other vessels, whether public or
private-but can you believe that this mere doing as you think best
is great power?
  Pol. Certainly not such doing as this.
  Soc. But can you tell me why you disapprove of such a power?
  Pol. I can.
  Soc. Why then?
  Pol. Why, because he who did as you say would be certain to be
punished.
  Soc. And punishment is an evil?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And you would admit once more, my good sir, that great power is
a benefit to a man if his actions turn out to his advantage, and
that this is the meaning of great power; and if not, then his power is
an evil and is no power. But let us look at the matter in another
way do we not acknowledge that the things of which we were speaking,
the infliction of death, and exile, and the deprivation of property
are sometimes a good and sometimes not a good?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. About that you and I may be supposed to agree?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. Tell me, then, when do you say that they are good and when that
they are evil-what principle do you lay down?
  Pol. I would rather, Socrates, that you should answer as well as ask
that question.
  Soc. Well, Polus, since you would rather have the answer from me,
I say that they are good when they are just, and evil when they are
unjust.
  Pol. You are hard of refutation, Socrates, but might not a child
refute that statement?
  Soc. Then I shall be very grateful to the child, and equally
grateful to you if you will refute me and deliver me from my
foolishness. And I hope that refute me you will, and not weary of
doing good to a friend.
  Pol. Yes, Socrates, and I need not go far or appeal to antiquity;
events which happened only a few days ago are enough to refute you,
and to prove that many men who do wrong are happy.
  Soc. What events?
  Pol. You see, I presume, that Archelaus the son of Perdiccas is
now the ruler of Macedonia?
  Soc. At any rate I hear that he is.
  Pol. And do you think that he is happy or miserable?
  Soc. I cannot say, Polus, for I have never had any acquaintance with
him.
  Pol. And cannot you tell at once, and without having an acquaintance
with him, whether a man is happy?
  Soc. Most certainly not.
  Pol. Then clearly, Socrates, you would say that you did not even
know whether the great king was a happy man?
  Soc. And I should speak the truth; for I do not know how he stands
in the matter of education and justice.
  Pol. What! and does all happiness consist in this?
  Soc. Yes, indeed, Polus, that is my doctrine; the men and women
who are gentle and good are also happy, as I maintain, and the
unjust and evil are miserable.
  Pol. Then, according to your doctrine, the said Archelaus is
miserable?
  Soc. Yes, my friend, if he is wicked.
  Pol. That he is wicked I cannot deny; for he had no title at all
to the throne which he now occupies, he being only the son of a
woman who was the slave of Alcetas the brother of Perdiccas; he
himself therefore in strict right was the slave of Alcetas; and if
he had meant to do rightly he would have remained his slave, and then,
according to your doctrine, he would have been happy. But now he is
unspeakably miserable, for he has been guilty of the greatest
crimes: in the first place he invited his uncle and master, Alcetas,
to come to him, under the pretence that he would restore to him the
throne which Perdiccas has usurped, and after entertaining him and his
son Alexander, who was his own cousin, and nearly of an age with
him, and making them drunk, he threw them into a waggon and carried
them off by night, and slew them, and got both of them out of the way;
and when he had done all this wickedness he never discovered that he
was the most miserable of all men, was very far from repenting:
shall I tell you how he showed his remorse? he had a younger
brother, a child of seven years old, who was the legitimate son of
Perdiccas, and to him of right the kingdom belonged; Archelaus,
however, had no mind to bring him up as he ought and restore the
kingdom to him; that was not his notion of happiness; but not long
afterwards he threw him into a well and drowned him, and declared to
his mother Cleopatra that he had fallen in while running after a
goose, and had been killed. And now as he is the greatest criminal
of all the Macedonians, he may be supposed to be the most miserable
and not the happiest of them, and I dare say that there are many
Athenians, and you would be at the head of them, who would rather be
any other Macedonian than Archelaus!
  Soc. I praised you at first, Polus, for being a rhetorician rather
than a reasoner. And this, as I suppose, is the sort of argument
with which you fancy that a child might refute me, and by which I
stand refuted when I say that the unjust man is not happy. But, my
good friend, where is the refutation? I cannot admit a word which
you have been saying.
  Pol. That is because you will not; for you surely must think as I
do.
  Soc. Not so, my simple friend, but because you will refute me
after the manner which rhetoricians practise in courts of law. For
there the one party think that they refute the other when they bring
forward a number of witnesses of good repute in proof of their
allegations, and their adversary has only a single one or none at all.
But this kind of proof is of no value where truth is the aim; a man
may often be sworn down by a multitude of false witnesses who have a
great air of respectability. And in this argument nearly every one,
Athenian and stranger alike, would be on your side, if you should
bring witnesses in disproof of my statement-you may, if you will,
summon Nicias the son of Niceratus, and let his brothers, who gave the
row of tripods which stand in the precincts of Dionysus, come with
him; or you may summon Aristocrates, the son of Scellius, who is the
giver of that famous offering which is at Delphi; summon, if you will,
the whole house of Pericles, or any other great Athenian family whom
you choose-they will all agree with you: I only am left alone and
cannot agree, for you do not convince me; although you produce many
false witnesses against me, in the hope of depriving me of my
inheritance, which is the truth. But I consider that nothing worth
speaking of will have been effected by me unless I make you the one
witness of my words; nor by you, unless you make me the one witness of
yours; no matter about the rest of the world. For there are two ways
of refutation, one which is yours and that of the world in general;
but mine is of another sort-let us compare them, and see in what
they differ. For, indeed, we are at issue about matters which to
know is honourable and not to know disgraceful; to know or not to know
happiness and misery-that is the chief of them. And what knowledge can
be nobler? or what ignorance more disgraceful than this? And therefore
I will begin by asking you whether you do not think that a man who
is unjust and doing injustice can be happy, seeing that you think
Archelaus unjust, and yet happy? May I assume this to be your opinion?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. But I say that this is an impossibility-here is one point about
which we are at issue:-very good. And do you mean to say also that
if he meets with retribution and punishment he will still be happy?
  Pol. Certainly not; in that case he will be most miserable.
  Soc. On the other hand, if the unjust be not punished, then,
according to you, he will be happy?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. But in my opinion, Polus, the unjust or doer of unjust
actions is miserable in any case,-more miserable, however, if he be
not punished and does not meet with retribution, and less miserable if
he be punished and meets with retribution at the hands of gods and
men.
  Pol. You are maintaining a strange doctrine, Socrates.
  Soc. I shall try to make you agree with me, O my friend, for as a
friend I regard you. Then these are the points at issue between us-are
they not? I was saying that to do is worse than to suffer injustice?
  Pol. Exactly so.
  Soc. And you said the opposite?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. I said also that the wicked are miserable, and you refuted me?
  Pol. By Zeus, I did.
  Soc. In your own opinion, Polus.
  Pol. Yes, and I rather suspect that I was in the right.
  Soc. You further said that the wrong-doer is happy if he be
unpunished?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And I affirm that he is most miserable, and that those who
are punished are less miserable-are you going to refute this
proposition also?
  Pol. A proposition which is harder of refutation than the other,
Socrates.
  Soc. Say rather, Polus, impossible; for who can refute the truth?
  Pol. What do you mean? If a man is detected in an unjust attempt
to make himself a tyrant, and when detected is racked, mutilated,
has his eyes burned out, and after having had all sorts of great
injuries inflicted on him, and having seen his wife and children
suffer the like, is at last impaled or tarred and burned alive, will
he be happier than if he escape and become a tyrant, and continue
all through life doing what he likes and holding the reins of
government, the envy and admiration both of citizens and strangers? Is
that the paradox which, as you say, cannot be refuted?
  Soc. There again, noble Polus, you are raising hobgoblins instead of
refuting me; just now you were calling witnesses against me. But
please to refresh my memory a little; did you say-"in an unjust
attempt to make himself a tyrant"?
  Pol. Yes, I did.
  Soc. Then I say that neither of them will be happier than the
other-neither he who unjustly acquires a tyranny, nor he who suffers
in the attempt, for of two miserables one cannot be the happier, but
that he who escapes and becomes a tyrant is the more miserable of
the two. Do you laugh, Polus? Well, this is a new kind of
refutation-when any one says anything, instead of refuting him to
laugh at him.
  Pol. But do you not think, Socrates, that you have been sufficiently
refuted, when you say that which no human being will allow? Ask the
company.
  Soc. O Polus, I am not a public man, and only last year, when my
tribe were serving as Prytanes, and it became my duty as their
president to take the votes, there was a laugh at me, because I was
unable to take them. And as I failed then, you must not ask me to
count the suffrages of the company now; but if, as I was saying, you
have no better argument than numbers, let me have a turn, and do you
make trial of the sort of proof which, as I think, is required; for
I shall produce one witness only of the truth of my words, and he is
the person with whom I am arguing; his suffrage I know how to take;
but with the many I have nothing to do, and do not even address myself
to them. May I ask then whether you will answer in turn and have
your words put to the proof? For I certainly think that I and you
and every man do really believe, that to do is a greater evil than
to suffer injustice: and not to be punished than to be punished.
  Pol. And I should say neither I, nor any man: would you yourself,
for example, suffer rather than do injustice?
  Soc. Yes, and you, too; I or any man would.
  Pol. Quite the reverse; neither you, nor I, nor any man.
  Soc. But will you answer?
  Pol. To be sure, I will-for I am curious to hear what you can have
to say.
  Soc. Tell me, then, and you will know, and let us suppose that I
am beginning at the beginning: which of the two, Polus, in your
opinion, is the worst?-to do injustice or to suffer?
  Pol. I should say that suffering was worst.
  Soc. And which is the greater disgrace?-Answer.
  Pol. To do.
  Soc. And the greater disgrace is the greater evil?
  Pol. Certainly not.
  Soc. I understand you to say, if I am not mistaken, that the
honourable is not the same as the good, or the disgraceful as the
evil?
  Pol. Certainly not.
  Soc. Let me ask a question of you: When you speak of beautiful
things, such as bodies, colours, figures, sounds, institutions, do you
not call them beautiful in reference to some standard: bodies, for
example, are beautiful in proportion as they are useful, or as the
sight of them gives pleasure to the spectators; can you give any other
account of personal beauty?
  Pol. I cannot.
  Soc. And you would say of figures or colours generally that they
were beautiful, either by reason of the pleasure which they give, or
of their use, or both?
  Pol. Yes, I should.
  Soc. And you would call sounds and music beautiful for the same
reason?
  Pol. I should.
  Soc. Laws and institutions also have no beauty in them except in
so far as they are useful or pleasant or both?
  Pol. I think not.
  Soc. And may not the same be said of the beauty of knowledge?
  Pol. To be sure, Socrates; and I very much approve of your measuring
beauty by the standard of pleasure and utility.
  Soc. And deformity or disgrace may be equally measured by the
opposite standard of pain and evil?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. Then when of two beautiful things one exceeds in beauty, the
measure of the excess is to be taken in one or both of these; that
is to say, in pleasure or utility or both?
  Pol. Very true.
  Soc. And of two deformed things, that which exceeds in deformity
or disgrace, exceeds either in pain or evil-must it not be so?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. But then again, what was the observation which you just now
made, about doing and suffering wrong? Did you not say, that suffering
wrong was more evil, and doing wrong more disgraceful?
  Pol. I did.
  Soc. Then, if doing wrong is more disgraceful than suffering, the
more disgraceful must be more painful and must exceed in pain or in
evil or both: does not that also follow?
  Pol. Of course.
  Soc. First, then, let us consider whether the doing of injustice
exceeds the suffering in the consequent pain: Do the injurers suffer
more than the injured?
  Pol. No, Socrates; certainly not.
  Soc. Then they do not exceed in pain?
  Pol. No.
  Soc. But if not in pain, then not in both?
  Pol. Certainly not.
  Soc. Then they can only exceed in the other?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. That is to say, in evil?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. Then doing injustice will have an excess of evil, and will
therefore be a greater evil than suffering injustice?
  Pol. Clearly.
  Soc. But have not you and the world already agreed that to do
injustice is more disgraceful than to suffer?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And that is now discovered to be more evil?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And would you prefer a greater evil or a greater dishonour to a
less one? Answer, Polus, and fear not; for you will come to no harm if
you nobly resign yourself into the healing hand of the argument as
to a physician without shrinking, and either say "Yes" or "No" to me.
  Pol. I should say "No."
  Soc. Would any other man prefer a greater to a less evil?
  Pol. No, not according to this way of putting the case, Socrates.
  Soc. Then I said truly, Polus that neither you, nor I, nor any
man, would rather, do than suffer injustice; for to do injustice is
the greater evil of the two.
  Pol. That is the conclusion.
  Soc. You see, Polus, when you compare the two kinds of
refutations, how unlike they are. All men, with the exception of
myself, are of your way of thinking; but your single assent and
witness are enough for me-I have no need of any other, I take your
suffrage, and am regardless of the rest. Enough of this, and now let
us proceed to the next question; which is, Whether the greatest of
evils to a guilty man is to suffer punishment, as you supposed, or
whether to escape punishment is not a greater evil, as I supposed.
Consider:-You would say that to suffer punishment is another name
for being justly corrected when you do wrong?
  Pol. I should.
  Soc. And would you not allow that all just things are honourable
in so far as they are just? Please to reflect, and, tell me your
opinion.
  Pol. Yes, Socrates, I think that they are.
  Soc. Consider again:-Where there is an agent, must there not also be
a patient?
  Pol. I should say so.
  Soc. And will not the patient suffer that which the agent does,
and will not the suffering have the quality of the action? I mean, for
example, that if a man strikes, there must be something which is
stricken?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And if the striker strikes violently or quickly, that which
is struck will he struck violently or quickly?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And the suffering to him who is stricken is of the same
nature as the act of him who strikes?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And if a man burns, there is something which is burned?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And if he burns in excess or so as to cause pain, the thing
burned will be burned in the same way?
  Pol. Truly.
  Soc. And if he cuts, the same argument holds-there will be something
cut?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And if the cutting be great or deep or such as will cause pain,
the cut will be of the same nature?
  Pol. That is evident.
  Soc. Then you would agree generally to the universal proposition
which I was just now asserting: that the affection of the patient
answers to the affection of the agent?
  Pol. I agree.
  Soc. Then, as this is admitted, let me ask whether being punished is
suffering or acting?
  Pol. Suffering, Socrates; there can be no doubt of that.
  Soc. And suffering implies an agent?
  Pol. Certainly, Socrates; and he is the punisher.
  Soc. And he who punishes rightly, punishes justly?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And therefore he acts justly?
  Pol. Justly.
  Soc. Then he who is punished and suffers retribution, suffers
justly?
  Pol. That is evident.
  Soc. And that which is just has been admitted to be honourable?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. Then the punisher does what is honourable, and the punished
suffers what is honourable?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And if what is honourable, then what is good, for the
honourable is either pleasant or useful?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. Then he who is punished suffers what is good?
  Pol. That is true.
  Soc. Then he is benefited?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. Do I understand you to mean what I mean by the term
"benefited"? I mean, that if he be justly punished his soul is
improved.
  Pol. Surely.
  Soc. Then he who is punished is delivered from the evil of his soul?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And is he not then delivered from the greatest evil? Look at
the matter in this way:-In respect of a man's estate, do you see any
greater evil than poverty?
  Pol. There is no greater evil.
  Soc. Again, in a man's bodily frame, you would say that the evil
is weakness and disease and deformity?
  Pol. I should.
  Soc. And do you not imagine that the soul likewise has some evil
of her own?
  Pol. Of course.
  Soc. And this you would call injustice and ignorance and
cowardice, and the like?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. So then, in mind, body, and estate, which are three, you have
pointed out three corresponding evils-injustice, disease, poverty?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And which of the evils is the most disgraceful?-Is not the most
disgraceful of them injustice, and in general the evil of the soul?
  Pol. By far the most.
  Soc. And if the most disgraceful, then also the worst?
  Pol. What do you mean, Socrates?
  Soc. I mean to say, that is most disgraceful has been already
admitted to be most painful or hurtful, or both.
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And now injustice and all evil in the soul has been admitted by
to be most disgraceful?
  Pol. It has been admitted.
  Soc. And most disgraceful either because most painful and causing
excessive pain, or most hurtful, or both?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And therefore to be unjust and intemperate, and cowardly and
ignorant, is more painful than to be poor and sick?
  Pol. Nay, Socrates; the painfulness does not appear to me to
follow from your premises.
  Soc. Then, if, as you would argue, not more painful, the evil of the
soul is of all evils the most disgraceful; and the excess of
disgrace must be caused by some preternatural greatness, or
extraordinary hurtfulness of the evil.
  Pol. Clearly.
  Soc. And that which exceeds most in hurtfulness will be the greatest
of evils?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. Then injustice and intemperance, and in general the depravity
of the soul, are the greatest of evils!
  Pol. That is evident.
  Soc. Now, what art is there which delivers us from poverty? Does not
the art of making money?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And what art frees us from disease? Does not the art of
medicine?
  Pol. Very true.
  Soc. And what from vice and injustice? If you are not able to answer
at once, ask yourself whither we go with the sick, and to whom we take
them.
  Pol. To the physicians, Socrates.
  Soc. And to whom do we go with the unjust and intemperate?
  Pol. To the judges, you mean.
  Soc. -Who are to punish them?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And do not those who rightly punish others, punish them in
accordance with a certain rule of justice?
  Pol. Clearly.
  Soc. Then the art of money-making frees a man from poverty; medicine
from disease; and justice from intemperance and injustice?
  Pol. That is evident.
  Soc. Which, then, is the best of these three?
  Pol. Will you enumerate them?
  Soc. Money-making, medicine, and justice.
  Pol. Justice, Socrates, far excels the two others.
  Soc. And justice, if the best, gives the greatest pleasure or
advantage or both?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. But is the being healed a pleasant thing, and are those who are
being healed pleased?
  Pol. I think not.
  Soc. A useful thing, then?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. Yes, because the patient is delivered from a great evil; and
this is the advantage of enduring the pain-that you get well?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. And would he be the happier man in his bodily condition, who is
healed, or who never was out of health?
  Pol. Clearly he who was never out of health.
  Soc. Yes; for happiness surely does not consist in being delivered
from evils, but in never having had them.
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And suppose the case of two persons who have some evil in their
bodies, and that one of them is healed and delivered from evil, and
another is not healed, but retains the evil-which of them is the
most miserable?
  Pol. Clearly he who is not healed.
  Soc. And was not punishment said by us to be a deliverance from
the greatest of evils, which is vice?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And justice punishes us, and makes us more just, and is the
medicine of our vice?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. He, then, has the first place in the scale of happiness who has
never had vice in his soul; for this has been shown to be the greatest
of evils.
  Pol. Clearly.
  Soc. And he has the second place, who is delivered from vice?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. That is to say, he who receives admonition and rebuke and
punishment?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. Then he lives worst, who, having been unjust, has no
deliverance from injustice?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. That is, he lives worst who commits the greatest crimes, and
who, being the most unjust of men, succeeds in escaping rebuke or
correction or punishment; and this, as you say, has been
accomplished by Archelaus and other tyrants and rhetoricians and
potentates?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. May not their way of proceeding, my friend, be compared to
the conduct of a person who is afflicted with the worst of diseases
and yet contrives not to pay the penalty to the physician for his sins
against his constitution, and will not be cured, because, like a
child, he is afraid of the pain of being burned or cut:-Is not that
a parallel case?
  Pol. Yes, truly.
  Soc. He would seem as if he did not know the nature of health and
bodily vigour; and if we are right, Polus, in our previous
conclusions, they are in a like case who strive to evade justice,
which they see to be painful, but are blind to the advantage which
ensues from it, not knowing how far more miserable a companion a
diseased soul is than a diseased body; a soul, I say, which is corrupt
and unrighteous and unholy. And hence they do all that they can to
avoid punishment and to avoid being released from the greatest of
evils; they provide themselves with money and friends, and cultivate
to the utmost their powers of persuasion. But if we, Polus, are right,
do you see what follows, or shall we draw out the consequences in
form?
  Pol. If you please.
  Soc. Is it not a fact that injustice, and the doing of injustice, is
the greatest of evils?
  Pol. That is quite clear.
  Soc. And further, that to suffer punishment is the way to be
released from this evil?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And not to suffer, is to perpetuate the evil?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. To do wrong, then, is second only in the scale of evils; but to
do wrong and not to be punished, is first and greatest of all?
  Pol. That is true.
  Soc. Well, and was not this the point in dispute, my friend? You
deemed Archelaus happy, because he was a very great criminal and
unpunished: I, on the other hand, maintained that he or any other
who like him has done wrong and has not been punished, is, and ought
to be, the most miserable of all men; and that the doer of injustice
is more miserable than the sufferer; and he who escapes punishment,
more miserable than he who suffers.-Was not that what I said?
  Pol. Yes.
  Soc. And it has been proved to be true?
  Pol. Certainly.
  Soc. Well, Polus, but if this is true, where is the great use of
rhetoric? If we admit what has been just now said, every man ought
in every way to guard himself against doing wrong, for he will thereby
suffer great evil?
  Pol. True.
  Soc. And if he, or any one about whom he cares, does wrong, he ought
of his own accord to go where he will be immediately punished; he will
run to the judge, as he would to the physician, in order that the
disease of injustice may not be rendered chronic and become the
incurable cancer of the soul; must we not allow this consequence,
Polus, if our former admissions are to stand:-is any other inference
consistent with them?
  Pol. To that, Socrates, there can be but one answer.
  Soc. Then rhetoric is of no use to us, Polus, in helping a man to
excuse his own injustice, that of his parents or friends, or
children or country; but may be of use to any one who holds that
instead of excusing he ought to accuse-himself above all, and in the
next degree his family or any of his friends who may be doing wrong;
he should bring to light the iniquity and not conceal it, that so
the wrong-doer may suffer and be made whole; and he should even
force himself and others not to shrink, but with closed eyes like
brave men to let the physician operate with knife or searing iron, not
regarding the pain, in the hope of attaining the good and the
honourable; let him who has done things worthy of stripes, allow
himself to be scourged, if of bonds, to be bound, if of a fine, to
be fined, if of exile, to be exiled, if of death, to die, himself
being the first to accuse himself and his relations, and using
rhetoric to this end, that his and their unjust actions may be made
manifest, and that they themselves may be delivered from injustice,
which is the greatest evil. Then, Polus, rhetoric would indeed be
useful. Do you say "Yes" or "No" to that?
  Pol. To me, Socrates, what you are saying appears very strange,
though probably in agreement with your premises.
  Soc. Is not this the conclusion, if the premises are not disproven?
  Pol. Yes; it certainly is.
  Soc. And from the opposite point of view, if indeed it be our duty
to harm another, whether an enemy or not-I except the case of
self-defence-then I have to be upon my guard-but if my enemy injures a
third person, then in every sort of way, by word as well as deed, I
should try to prevent his being punished, or appearing before the
judge; and if he appears, I should contrive that he should escape, and
not suffer punishment: if he has stolen a sum of money, let him keep
what he has stolen and spend it on him and his, regardless of religion
and justice; and if he has done things worthy of death, let him not
die, but rather be immortal in his wickedness; or, if this is not
possible, let him at any rate be allowed to live as long as he can.
For such purposes, Polus, rhetoric may be useful, but is of small if
of any use to him who is not intending to commit injustice; at
least, there was no such use discovered by us in the previous
discussion.
  Cal. Tell me, Chaerephon, is Socrates in earnest, or is he joking?
  Chaer. I should say, Callicles, that he is in most profound earnest;
but you may well ask him
  Cal. By the gods, and I will. Tell me, Socrates, are you in earnest,
or only in jest? For if you are in earnest, and what you say is
true, is not the whole of human life turned upside down; and are we
not doing, as would appear, in everything the opposite of what we
ought to be doing?
  Soc. O Callicles, if there were not some community of feelings among
mankind, however varying in different persons-I mean to say, if
every man's feelings were peculiar to himself and were not shared by
the rest of his species-I do not see how we could ever communicate our
impressions to one another. I make this remark because I perceive that
you and I have a common feeling. For we are lovers both, and both of
us have two loves apiece:-I am the lover of Alcibiades, the son of
Cleinias-I and of philosophy; and you of the Athenian Demus, and of
Demus the son of Pyrilampes. Now, I observe that you, with all your
cleverness, do not venture to contradict your favourite in any word or
opinion of his; but as he changes you change, backwards and
forwards. When the Athenian Demus denies anything that you are
saying in the assembly, you go over to his opinion; and you do the
same with Demus, the fair young son of Pyrilampes. For you have not
the power to resist the words and ideas of your loves; and is a person
were to express surprise at the strangeness of what you say from
time to time when under their influence, you would probably reply to
him, if you were honest, that you cannot help saying what your loves
say unless they are prevented; and that you can only be silent when
they are. Now you must understand that my words are an echo too, and
therefore you need not wonder at me; but if you want to silence me,
silence philosophy, who is my love, for she is always telling me
what I am telling you, my friend; neither is she capricious like my
other love, for the son of Cleinias says one thing to-day and
another thing to-morrow, but philosophy is always true. She is the
teacher at whose words you are. now wondering, and you have heard
her yourself. Her you must refute, and either show, as I was saying,
that to do injustice and to escape punishment is not the worst of
all evils; or, if you leave her word unrefuted, by the dog the god
of Egypt, I declare, O Callicles, that Callicles will never be at
one with himself, but that his whole life, will be a discord. And yet,
my friend, I would rather that my lyre should be inharmonious, and
that there should be no music in the chorus which I provided; aye,
or that the whole world should be at odds with me, and oppose me,
rather than that I myself should be at odds with myself, and
contradict myself.
  Cal. O Socrates, you are a regular declaimer, and seem to be running
riot in the argument. And now you are declaiming in this way because
Polus has fallen into the same error himself of which he accused
Gorgias:-for he said that when Gorgias was asked by you, whether, if
some one came to him who wanted to learn rhetoric, and did not know
justice, he would teach him justice, Gorgias in his modesty replied
that he would, because he thought that mankind in general would be
displeased if he answered "No"; and then in consequence of this
admission, Gorgias was compelled to contradict himself, that being
just the sort of thing in which you delight. Whereupon Polus laughed
at you deservedly, as I think; but now he has himself fallen into
the same trap. I cannot say very much for his wit when he conceded
to you that to do is more dishonourable than to suffer injustice,
for this was the admission which led to his being entangled by you;
and because he was too modest to say what he thought, he had his mouth
stopped. For the truth is, Socrates, that you, who pretend to be
engaged in the pursuit of truth, are appealing now to the popular
and vulgar notions of right, which are not natural, but only
conventional. Convention and nature are generally at variance with one
another: and hence, if a person is too modest to say what he thinks,
he is compelled to contradict himself; and you, in your ingenuity
perceiving the advantage to be thereby gained, slyly ask of him who is
arguing conventionally a question which is to be determined by the
rule of nature; and if he is talking of the rule of nature, you slip
away to custom: as, for instance, you did in this very discussion
about doing and suffering injustice. When Polus was speaking of the
conventionally dishonourable, you assailed him from the point of
view of nature; for by the rule of nature, to suffer injustice is
the greater disgrace because the greater evil; but conventionally,
to do evil is the more disgraceful. For the suffering of injustice
is hot the part of a man, but of a slave, who indeed had better die
than live; since when he is wronged and trampled upon, he is unable to
help himself, or any other about whom he cares. The reason, as I
conceive, is that the makers of laws are the majority who are weak;
and they, make laws and distribute praises and censures with a view to
themselves and to their own interests; and they: terrify the
stronger sort of men, and those who are able to get the better of them
in order that they may not get the better of them; and they say,
that dishonesty is shameful and unjust; meaning, by the word
injustice, the desire of a man to have more than his neighbours; for
knowing their own inferiority, I suspect that they are too glad of
equality. And therefore the endeavour to have more than the many, is
conventionally said to be shameful and unjust, and is called
injustice, whereas nature herself intimates that it is just for the
better to have more than the worse, the more powerful than the weaker;
and in many ways she shows, among men as well as among animals, and
indeed among whole cities and races, that justice consists in the
superior ruling over and having more than the inferior. For on what
principle of justice did Xerxes invade Hellas, or his father the
Scythians? (not to speak of numberless other examples). Nay, but these
are the men who act according to nature; yes, by Heaven, and according
to the law of nature: not, perhaps, according to that artificial
law, which we invent and impose upon our fellows, of whom we take
the best and strongest from their youth upwards, and tame them like
young lions, -charming them with the sound of the voice, and saying to
them, that with equality they must be content, and that the equal is
the honourable and the just. But if there were a man who had
sufficient force, he would shake off and break through, and escape
from all this; he would trample under foot all our formulas and spells
and charms, and all our laws which are against nature: the slave would
rise in rebellion and be lord over us, and the light of natural
justice would shine forth. And this I take to be the sentiment of
Pindar, when he says in his poem, that

   Law is the king of all, of mortals as well as of immortals;

this, as he says,

   Makes might to be right, doing violence with highest hand; as I
infer from the deeds of Heracles, for without buying them-

-I do not remember the exact words, but the meaning is, that without
buying them, and without their being given to him, he carried off
the oxen of Geryon, according to the law of natural right, and that
the oxen and other possessions of the weaker and inferior properly
belong to the stronger and superior. And this is true, as you may
ascertain, if you will leave philosophy and go on to higher things:
for philosophy, Socrates, if pursued in moderation and at the proper
age, is an elegant accomplishment, but too much philosophy is the ruin
of human life. Even if a man has good parts, still, if he carries
philosophy into later life, he is necessarily ignorant of all those
things which a gentleman and a person of honour ought to know; he is
inexperienced in the laws of the State, and in the language which
ought to be used in the dealings of man with man, whether private or
public, and utterly ignorant of the pleasures and desires of mankind
and of human character in general. And people of this sort, when
they betake themselves to politics or business, are as ridiculous as I
imagine the politicians to be, when they make their appearance in
the arena of philosophy. For, as Euripides says,

   Every man shines in that and pursues that, and devotes the greatest
portion of the day to that in which he most excels,

but anything in which he is inferior, he avoids and depreciates, and
praises the opposite partiality to himself, and because he from that
he will thus praise himself. The true principle is to unite them.
Philosophy, as a part of education, is an excellent thing, and there
is no disgrace to a man while he is young in pursuing such a study;
but when he is more advanced in years, the thing becomes ridiculous,
and I feel towards philosophers as I do towards those who lisp and
imitate children. For I love to see a little child, who is not of an
age to speak plainly, lisping at his play; there is an appearance of
grace and freedom in his utterance, which is natural to his childish
years. But when I hear some small creature carefully articulating
its words, I am offended; the sound is disagreeable, and has to my
ears the twang of slavery. So when I hear a man lisping, or see him
playing like a child, his behaviour appears to me ridiculous and
unmanly and worthy of stripes. And I have the same feeling about
students of philosophy; when I see a youth thus engaged-the study
appears to me to be in character, and becoming a man of liberal
education, and him who neglects philosophy I regard as an inferior
man, who will never aspire to anything great or noble. But if I see
him continuing the study in later life, and not leaving off, I
should like to beat him, Socrates; for, as I was saying, such a one,
even though he have good natural parts, becomes effeminate. He flies
from the busy centre and the market-place, in which, as the poet says,
men become distinguished; he creeps into a corner for the rest of
his life, and talks in a whisper with three or four admiring you,
but never speaks out like a freeman in a satisfactory manner. Now I,
Socrates, am very well inclined towards you, and my feeling may be
compared with that of Zethus towards Amphion, in the play of
Euripides, whom I was mentioning just now: for I am disposed to say to
you much what Zethus said to his brother, that you, Socrates, are
careless about the things of which you ought to be careful; and that
you

    Who have a soul so noble, are remarkable for a puerile exterior;
    Neither in a court of justice could you state a case, or give any
        reason or proof, offer valiant counsel on another's behalf.

And you must not be offended, my dear Socrates, for I am speaking
out of good-will towards you, if I ask whether you are not ashamed
of being thus defenceless; which I affirm to be the condition not of
you only but of all those who will carry the study of philosophy too
far. For suppose that some one were to take you, or any one of your
sort, off to prison, declaring that you had done wrong when you had
done no wrong, you must allow that you would not know what to
do:-there you would stand giddy and gaping, and not having a word to
say; and when you went up before the Court, even if the accuser were a
poor creature and not good for much, you would die if he were disposed
to claim the penalty of death. And yet, Socrates, what is the value of

  An art which converts a man of sense into a fool,

who is helpless, and has no power to save either himself or others,
when he is in the greatest danger and is going to be despoiled by
his enemies of all his goods, and has to live, simply deprived of
his rights of citizenship?-he being a man who, if I may use the
expression, may be boxed on the ears with impunity. Then, my good
friend, take my advice, and refute no more:

    Learn the philosophy of business, and acquire the reputation
        of wisdom.
    But leave to others these niceties,

whether they are to be described as follies or absurdities:

    For they will only
    Give you poverty for the inmate of your dwelling.

  Cease, then, emulating these paltry splitters of words, and
emulate only the man of substance and honour, who is well to do.
  Soc. If my soul, Callicles, were made of gold, should I not
rejoice to discover one of those stones with which they test gold, and
the very best possible one to which I might bring my soul; and if
the stone and I agreed in approving of her training, then I should
know that I was in a satisfactory state, and that no other test was
needed by me.
  Cal. What is your meaning, Socrates?
  Soc. I will tell you; I think that I have found in you the desired
touchstone.
  Cal. Why?
  Soc. Because I am sure that if you agree with me in any of the
opinions which my soul forms, I have at last found the truth indeed.
For I consider that if a man is to make a complete trial of the good
or evil of the soul, he ought to have three qualities-knowledge,
good-will, outspokenness, which are all possessed by you. Many whom
I meet are unable to make trial of me, because they are not wise as
you are; others are wise, but they will not tell me the truth, because
they have not the same interest in me which you have; and these two
strangers, Gorgias and Polus, are undoubtedly wise men and my very
good friends, but they are not outspoken enough, and they are too
modest. Why, their modesty is so great that they are driven to
contradict themselves, first one and then the other of them, in the
face of a large company, on matters of the highest moment. But you
have all the qualities in which these others are deficient, having
received an excellent education; to this many Athenians can testify.
And are my friend. Shall I tell you why I think so? I know that you,
Callicles, and Tisander of Aphidnae, and Andron the son of
Androtion, and Nausicydes of the deme of Cholarges, studied
together: there were four of you, and I once heard you advising with
one another as to the extent to which the pursuit of philosophy should
be carried, and, as I know, you came to the conclusion that the
study should not be pushed too much into detail. You were cautioning
one another not to be overwise; you were afraid that too much wisdom
might unconsciously to yourselves be the ruin of you. And now when I
hear you giving the same advice to me which you then gave to your most
intimate friends, I have a sufficient evidence of your real goodwill
to me. And of the frankness of your nature and freedom from modesty
I am assured by yourself, and the assurance is confirmed by your
last speech. Well then, the inference in the present case clearly
is, that if you agree with me in an argument about any point, that
point will have been sufficiently tested by us, and will not require
to be submitted to any further test. For you could not have agreed
with me, either from lack of knowledge or from superfluity of modesty,
nor yet from a desire to deceive me, for you are my friend, as you
tell me yourself. And therefore when you and I are agreed, the
result will be the attainment of perfect truth. Now there is no nobler
enquiry, Callicles, than that which you censure me for making,-What
ought the character of a man to be, and what his pursuits, and how far
is he to go, both in maturer years and in youth? For be assured that
if I err in my own conduct I do not err intentionally, but from
ignorance. Do not then desist from advising me, now that you have
begun, until I have learned clearly what this is which I am to
practise, and how I may acquire it. And if you find me assenting to
your words, and hereafter not doing that to which I assented, call
me "dolt," and deem me unworthy of receiving further instruction. Once
more, then, tell me what you and Pindar mean by natural justice: Do
you not mean that the superior should take the property of the
inferior by force; that the better should rule the worse, the noble
have more than the mean? Am I not right in my recollection?
  Cal. Yes; that is what I was saying, and so I still aver.
  Soc. And do you mean by the better the same as the superior? for I
could not make out what you were saying at the time-whether you
meant by the superior the stronger, and that the weaker must obey
the stronger, as you seemed to imply when you said that great cities
attack small ones in accordance with-natural right, because they are
superior and stronger, as though the superior and stronger and
better were the same; or whether the better may be also the inferior
and weaker, and the superior the worse, or whether better is to be
defined in the same way as superior: this is the point which I want to
have cleared up. Are the superior and better and stronger the same
or different?
  Cal. I say unequivocally that they are the same.
  Soc. Then the many are by nature to the one, against whom, as you
were saying, they make the laws?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. Then the laws of the many are the laws of the superior?
  Cal. Very true.
  Soc. Then they are the laws of the better; for the superior class
are far better, as you were saying?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And since they are superior, the laws which are made by them
are by nature good?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And are not the many of opinion, as you were lately saying,
that justice is equality, and that to do is more disgraceful than to
suffer injustice?-is that so or not? Answer, Callicles, and let no
modesty be: found to come in the way; do the many think, or do they
not think thus?-I must beg of you to answer, in order that if you
agree with me I may fortify myself by the assent of so competent an
authority.
  Cal. Yes; the opinion of the many is what you say.
  Soc. Then not only custom but nature also affirms that to do is more
disgraceful than to suffer injustice, and that justice is equality; so
that you seem to have been wrong in your former assertion, when
accusing me you said that nature and custom are opposed, and that I,
knowing this, was dishonestly playing between them, appealing to
custom when the argument is about nature, and to nature when the
argument is about custom?
  Cal. This man will never cease talking nonsense. At your age,
Socrates, are you not ashamed to be catching at words and chuckling
over some verbal slip? do you not see-have I not told you already,
that by superior I mean better: do you imagine me to say, that if a
rabble of slaves and nondescripts, who are of no use except perhaps
for their physical strength, get together their ipsissima verba are
laws?
  Soc. Ho! my philosopher, is that your line?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. I was thinking, Callicles, that something of the kind must have
been in your mind, and that is why I repeated the question-What is the
superior? I wanted to know clearly what you meant; for you surely do
not think that two men are better than one, or that your slaves are
better than you because they are stronger? Then please to begin again,
and tell me who the better are, if they are not the stronger; and I
will ask you, great Sir, to be a little milder in your instructions,
or I shall have to run away from you.
  Cal. You are ironical.
  Soc. No, by the hero Zethus, Callicles, by whose aid you were just
now saying many ironical things against me, I am not:-tell me, then,
whom you mean, by the better?
  Cal. I mean the more excellent.
  Soc. Do you not see that you are yourself using words which have
no meaning and that you are explaining nothing?-will you tell me
whether you mean by the better and superior the wiser, or if not,
whom?
  Cal. Most assuredly, I do mean the wiser.
  Soc. Then according to you, one wise man may often be superior to
ten thousand fools, and he ought them, and they ought to be his
subjects, and he ought to have more than they should. This is what I
believe that you mean (and you must not suppose that I am
word-catching), if you allow that the one is superior to the ten
thousand?
  Cal. Yes; that is what I mean, and that is what I conceive to be
natural justice-that the better and wiser should rule have more than
the inferior.
  Soc. Stop there, and let me ask you what you would say in this case:
Let us suppose that we are all together as we are now; there are
several of us, and we have a large common store of meats and drinks,
and there are all sorts of persons in our company having various
degrees of strength and weakness, and one of us, being physician, is
wiser in the matter of food than all the rest, and he is probably
stronger than some and not so strong as others of us-will he not,
being wiser, be also better than we are, and our superior in this
matter of food?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. Either, then, he will have a larger share of the meats and
drinks, because he is better, or he will have the distribution of
all of them by reason of his authority, but he will not expend or make
use of a larger share of them on his own person, or if he does, he
will be punished-his share will exceed that of some, and be less
than that of others, and if he be the weakest of all, he being the
best of all will have the smallest share of all, Callicles:-am I not
right, my friend?
  Cal. You talk about meats and drinks and physicians and other
nonsense; I am not speaking of them.
  Soc. Well, but do you admit that the wiser is the better? Answer
"Yes" or "No."
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And ought not the better to have a larger share?
  Cal. Not of meats and drinks.
  Soc. I understand: then, perhaps, of coats -the skilfullest weaver
ought to have the largest coat, and the greatest number of them, and
go about clothed in the best and finest of them?
  Cal. Fudge about coats!
  Soc. Then the skilfullest and best in making shoes ought to have the
advantage in shoes; the shoemaker, clearly, should walk about in the
largest shoes, and have the greatest number of them?
  Cal. Fudge about shoes! What nonsense are you talking?
  Soc. Or, if this is not your meaning, perhaps you would say that the
wise and good and true husbandman should actually have a larger
share of seeds, and have as much seed as possible for his own land?
  Cal. How you go on, always talking in the same way, Socrates!
  Soc. Yes, Callicles, and also about the same things.
  Cal. Yes, by the Gods, you are literally always talking of
cobblers and fullers and cooks and doctors, as if this had to do
with our argument.
  Soc. But why will you not tell me in what a man must be superior and
wiser in order to claim a larger share; will you neither accept a
suggestion, nor offer one?
  Cal. I have already told you. In the first place, I mean by
superiors not cobblers or cooks, but wise politicians who understand
the administration of a state, and who are not only wise, but also
valiant and able to carry. out their designs, and not the men to faint
from want of soul.
  Soc. See now, most excellent Callicles, how different my charge
against you is from that which you bring against me, for you
reproach me with always saying the same; but I reproach you with never
saying the same about the same things, for at one time you were
defining the better and the superior to be the stronger, then again as
the wiser, and now you bring forward a new notion; the superior and
the better are now declared by you to be the more courageous: I
wish, my good friend, that you would tell me once for all, whom you
affirm to be the better and superior, and in what they are better?
  Cal. I have already told you that I mean those who are wise and
courageous in the administration of a state-they ought to be the
rulers of their states, and justice consists in their having more than
their subjects.
  Soc. But whether rulers or subjects will they or will they not
have more than themselves, my friend?
  Cal. What do you mean?
  Soc. I mean that every man is his own ruler; but perhaps you think
that there is no necessity for him to rule himself; he is only
required to rule others?
  Cal. What do you mean by his "ruling over himself"?
  Soc. A simple thing enough; just what is commonly said, that a man
should be temperate and master of himself, and ruler of his own
pleasures and passions.
  Cal. What innocence! you mean those fools-the temperate?
  Soc. Certainly:-any one may know that to be my meaning.
  Cal. Quite so, Socrates; and they are really fools, for how can a
man be happy who is the servant of anything? On the contrary, I
plainly assert, that he who would truly live ought to allow his
desires to wax to the uttermost, and not to chastise them; but when
they have grown to their greatest he should have courage and
intelligence to minister to them and to satisfy all his longings.
And this I affirm to be natural justice and nobility. To this
however the many cannot attain; and they blame the strong man
because they are ashamed of their own weakness, which they desire to
conceal, and hence they say that intemperance is base. As I have
remarked already, they enslave the nobler natures, and being unable to
satisfy their pleasures, they praise temperance and justice out of
their own cowardice. For if a man had been originally the son of a
king, or had a nature capable of acquiring an empire or a tyranny or
sovereignty, what could be more truly base or evil than temperance--to
a man like him, I say, who might freely be enjoying every good, and
has no one to stand in his way, and yet has admitted custom and reason
and the opinion of other men to be lords over him?-must not he be in a
miserable plight whom the reputation of justice and temperance hinders
from giving more to his friends than to his enemies, even though he be
a ruler in his city? Nay, Socrates, for you profess to be a votary
of the truth, and the truth is this:-that luxury and intemperance
and licence, if they be provided with means, are virtue and
happiness-all the rest is a mere bauble, agreements contrary to
nature, foolish talk of men, nothing worth.
  Soc. There is a noble freedom, Callicles, in your way of approaching
the argument; for what you say is what the rest of the world think,
but do not like to say. And I must beg of you to persevere, that the
true rule of human life may become manifest. Tell me, then:-you say,
do you not, that in the rightly-developed man the passions ought not
to be controlled, but that we should let them grow to the utmost and
somehow or other satisfy them, and that this is virtue?
  Cal. Yes; I do.
  Soc. Then those who want nothing are not truly said to be happy?
  Cal. No indeed, for then stones and dead men would be the happiest
of all.
  Soc. But surely life according to your view is an awful thing; and
indeed I think that Euripides may have been right in saying,

     Who knows if life be not death and death life;

and that we are very likely dead; I have heard a philosopher say
that at this moment we are actually dead, and that the body (soma)
is our tomb (sema), and that the part of the soul which is the seat of
the desires is liable to be tossed about by words and blown up and
down; and some ingenious person, probably a Sicilian or an Italian,
playing with the word, invented a tale in which he called the
soul-because of its believing and make-believe nature-a vessel, and
the ignorant he called the uninitiated or leaky, and the place in
the souls of the uninitiated in which the desires are seated, being
the intemperate and incontinent part, he compared to a vessel full
of holes, because it can never be satisfied. He is not of your way
of thinking, Callicles, for he declares, that of all the souls in
Hades, meaning the invisible world these uninitiated or leaky
persons are the most miserable, and that they pour water into a vessel
which is full of holes out of a colander which is similarly
perforated. The colander, as my informer assures me, is the soul,
and the soul which he compares to a colander is the soul of the
ignorant, which is likewise full of holes, and therefore
incontinent, owing to a bad memory and want of faith. These notions
are strange enough, but they show the principle which, if I can, I
would fain prove to you; that you should change your mind, and,
instead of the intemperate and insatiate life, choose that which is
orderly and sufficient and has a due provision for daily needs. Do I
make any impression on you, and are you coming over to the opinion
that the orderly are happier than the intemperate? Or do I fail to
persuade you, and, however many tales I rehearse to you, do you
continue of the same opinion still?
  Cal. The latter, Socrates, is more like the truth.
  Soc. Well, I will tell you another image, which comes out of the
same school:-Let me request you to consider how far you would accept
this as an account of the two lives of the temperate and intemperate
in a figure:-There are two men, both of whom have a number of casks;
the one man has his casks sound and full, one of wine, another of
honey, and a third of milk, besides others filled with other
liquids, and the streams which fill them are few and scanty, and he
can only obtain them with a great deal of toil and difficulty; but
when his casks are once filled he has need to feed them anymore, and
has no further trouble with them or care about them. The other, in
like manner, can procure streams, though not without difficulty; but
his vessels are leaky and unsound, and night and day he is compelled
to be filling them, and if he pauses for a moment, he is in an agony
of pain. Such are their respective lives:-And now would you say that
the life of the intemperate is happier than that of the temperate?
Do I not convince you that the opposite is the truth?
  Cal. You do not convince me, Socrates, for the one who has filled
himself has no longer any pleasure left; and this, as I was just now
saying, is the life of a stone: he has neither joy nor sorrow after he
is once filled; but the pleasure depends on the superabundance of
the influx.
  Soc. But the more you pour in, the greater the waste; and the
holes must be large for the liquid to escape.
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. The life which you are now depicting is not that of a dead man,
or of a stone, but of a cormorant; you mean that he is to be hungering
and eating?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And he is to be thirsting and drinking?
  Cal. Yes, that is what I mean; he is to have all his desires about
him, and to be able to live happily in the gratification of them.
  Soc. Capital, excellent; go on as you have begun, and have no shame;
I, too, must disencumber myself of shame: and first, will you tell
me whether you include itching and scratching, provided you have
enough of them and pass your life in scratching, in your notion of
happiness?
  Cal. What a strange being you are, Socrates! a regular mob-orator.
  Soc. That was the reason, Callicles, why I scared Polus and Gorgias,
until they were too modest to say what they thought; but you will
not be too modest and will not be scared, for you are a brave man. And
now, answer my question.
  Cal. I answer, that even the scratcher would live pleasantly.
  Soc. And if pleasantly, then also happily?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. But what if the itching is not confined to the head? Shall I
pursue the question? And here, Callicles, I would have you consider
how you would reply if consequences are pressed upon you, especially
if in the last resort you are asked, whether the life of a catamite is
not terrible, foul, miserable? Or would you venture to say, that
they too are happy, if they only get enough of what they want?
  Cal. Are you not ashamed, Socrates, of introducing such topics
into the argument?
  Soc. Well, my fine friend, but am I the introducer of these
topics, or he who says without any qualification that all who feel
pleasure in whatever manner are happy, and who admits of no
distinction between good and bad pleasures? And I would still ask,
whether you say that pleasure and good are the same, or whether
there is some pleasure which is not a good?
  Cal. Well, then, for the sake of consistency, I will say that they
are the same.
  Soc. You are breaking the original agreement, Callicles, and will no
longer be a satisfactory companion in the search after truth, if you
say what is contrary to your real opinion.
  Cal. Why, that is what you are doing too, Socrates.
  Soc. Then we are both doing wrong. Still, my dear friend, I would
ask you to consider whether pleasure, from whatever source derived, is
the good; for, if this be true, then the disagreeable consequences
which have been darkly intimated must follow, and many others.
  Cal. That, Socrates, is only your opinion.
  Soc. And do you, Callicles, seriously maintain what you are saying?
  Cal. Indeed I do.
  Soc. Then, as you are in earnest, shall we proceed with the
argument?
  Cal. By all means.
  Soc. Well, if you are willing to proceed, determine this question
for me:-There is something, I presume, which you would call knowledge?

  Cal. There is.
  Soc. And were you not saying just now, that some courage implied
knowledge?
  Cal. I was.
  Soc. And you were speaking of courage and knowledge as two things
different from one another?
  Cal. Certainly I was.
  Soc. And would you say that pleasure and knowledge are the same,
or not the same?
  Cal. Not the same, O man of wisdom.
  Soc. And would you say that courage differed from pleasure?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. Well, then, let us remember that Callicles, the Acharnian, says
that pleasure and good are the same; but that knowledge and courage
are not the same, either with one another, or with the good.
  Cal. And what does our friend Socrates, of Foxton, say -does he
assent to this, or not?
  Soc. He does not assent; neither will Callicles, when he sees
himself truly. You will admit, I suppose, that good and evil fortune
are opposed to each other?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And if they are opposed to each other, then, like health and
disease, they exclude one another; a man cannot have them both, or
be without them both, at the same time?
  Cal. What do you mean?
  Soc. Take the case of any bodily affection:-a man may have the
complaint in his eyes which is called ophthalmia?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. But he surely cannot have the same eyes well and sound at the
same time?
  Cal. Certainly not.
  Soc. And when he has got rid of his ophthalmia, has he got rid of
the health of his eyes too? Is the final result, that he gets rid of
them both together?
  Cal. Certainly not.
  Soc. That would surely be marvellous and absurd?
  Cal. Very.
  Soc. I suppose that he is affected by them, and gets rid of them
in turns?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And he may have strength and weakness in the same way, by fits?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Or swiftness and slowness?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. And does he have and not have good and happiness, and their
opposites, evil and misery, in a similar alternation?
  Cal. Certainly he has.
  Soc. If then there be anything which a man has and has not at the
same time, clearly that cannot be good and evil-do we agree? Please
not to answer without consideration.
  Cal. I entirely agree.
  Soc. Go back now to our former admissions.-Did you say that to
hunger, I mean the mere state of hunger, was pleasant or painful?
  Cal. I said painful, but that to eat when you are hungry is
pleasant.
  Soc. I know; but still the actual hunger is painful: am I not right?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And thirst, too, is painful?
  Cal. Yes, very.
  Soc. Need I adduce any more instances, or would you agree that all
wants or desires are painful?
  Cal. I agree, and therefore you need not adduce any more instances.
   Soc. Very good. And you would admit that to drink, when you are
thirsty, is pleasant?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And in the sentence which you have just uttered, the word
"thirsty" implies pain?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And the word "drinking" is expressive of pleasure, and of the
satisfaction of the want?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. There is pleasure in drinking?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. When you are thirsty?
  Soc. And in pain?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Do you see the inference:-that pleasure and pain are
simultaneous, when you say that being thirsty, you drink? For are they
not simultaneous, and do they not affect at the same time the same
part, whether of the soul or the body?-which of them is affected
cannot be supposed to be of any consequence: Is not this true?
  Cal. It is.
  Soc. You said also, that no man could have good and evil fortune
at the same time?
  Cal. Yes, I did.
  Soc. But, you admitted that when in pain a man might also have
pleasure?
  Cal. Clearly.
  Soc. Then pleasure is not the same as good fortune, or pain the same
as evil fortune, and therefore the good is not the same as the
pleasant?
  Cal. I wish I knew, Socrates, what your quibbling means.
  Soc. You know, Callicles, but you affect not to know.
  Cal. Well, get on, and don't keep fooling: then you will know what a
wiseacre you are in your admonition of me.
  Soc. Does not a man cease from his thirst and from his pleasure in
drinking at the same time?
  Cal. I do not understand what you are saying.
  Gor. Nay, Callicles, answer, if only for our sakes;-we should like
to hear the argument out.
  Cal. Yes, Gorgias, but I must complain of the habitual trifling of
Socrates; he is always arguing about little and unworthy questions.
  Gor. What matter? Your reputation, Callicles, is not at stake. Let
Socrates argue in his own fashion.
  Cal. Well, then, Socrates, you shall ask these little peddling
questions, since Gorgias wishes to have them.
  Soc. I envy you, Callicles, for having been initiated into the great
mysteries before you were initiated into the lesser. I thought that
this was not allowable, But to return to our argument:-Does not a
man cease from thirsting and from pleasure of drinking at the same
moment?
  Cal. True.
  Soc. And if he is hungry, or has any other desire, does he not cease
from the desire and the pleasure at the same moment?
  Cal. Very true.
  Soc. Then he ceases from pain and pleasure at the same moment?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. But he does not cease from good and evil at the same moment, as
you have admitted: do you still adhere to what you said?
  Cal. Yes, I do; but what is the inference?
  Soc. Why, my friend, the inference is that the good is not the
same as the pleasant, or the evil the same as the painful; there is
a cessation of pleasure and pain at the same moment; but not of good
and evil, for they are different. How then can pleasure be the same as
good, or pain as evil? And I would have you look at the matter in
another light, which could hardly, I think, have been considered by
you identified them: Are not the good they have good present with
them, as the beautiful are those who have beauty present with them?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And do you call the fools and cowards good men? For you were
saying just now that the courageous and the wise are the good would
you not say so?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. And did you never see a foolish child rejoicing?
  Cal. Yes, I have.
  Soc. And a foolish man too?
  Cal. Yes, certainly; but what is your drift?
  Soc. Nothing particular, if you will only answer.
  Cal. Yes, I have.
  Soc. And did you ever see a sensible man rejoicing or sorrowing?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Which rejoice and sorrow most-the wise or the foolish?
  Cal. They are much upon a par, I think, in that respect.
  Soc. Enough: And did you ever see a coward in battle?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. And which rejoiced most at the departure of the enemy, the
coward or the brave?
  Cal. I should say "most" of both; or at any rate, they rejoiced
about equally.
  Soc. No matter; then the cowards, and not only the brave, rejoice?
  Cal. Greatly.
  Soc. And the foolish; so it would seem?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And are only the cowards pained at the approach of their
enemies, or are the brave also pained?
  Cal. Both are pained.
  Soc. And are they equally pained?
  Cal. I should imagine that the cowards are more pained.
  Soc. And are they better pleased at the enemy's departure?
  Cal. I dare say.
  Soc. Then are the foolish and the wise and the cowards and the brave
all pleased and pained, as you were saying, in nearly equal degree;
but are the cowards more pleased and pained than the brave?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. But surely the wise and brave are the good, and the foolish and
the cowardly are the bad?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Then the good and the bad are pleased and pained in a nearly
equal degree?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Then are the good and bad good and bad in a nearly equal
degree, or have the bad the advantage both in good and evil? [i.e.
in having more pleasure and more pain.]
  Cal I really do not know what you mean.
  Soc. Why, do you not remember saying that the good were good because
good was present with them, and the evil because evil; and that
pleasures were goods and pains evils?
  Cal. Yes, I remember.
  Soc. And are not these pleasures or goods present to those who
rejoice-if they do rejoice?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. Then those who rejoice are good when goods are present with
them?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And those who are in pain have evil or sorrow present with
them?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And would you still say that the evil are evil by reason of the
presence of evil?
  Cal. I should.
  Soc. Then those who rejoice are good, and those who are in pain
evil?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. The degrees of good and evil vary with the degrees of
pleasure and of pain?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Have the wise man and the fool, the brave and the coward, joy
and pain in nearly equal degrees? or would you say that the coward has
more?
  Cal. I should say that he has.
  Soc. Help me then to draw out the conclusion which follows from
our admissions; for it is good to repeat and review what is good twice
and thrice over, as they say. Both the wise man and the brave man we
allow to be good?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And the foolish man and the coward to be evil?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. And he who has joy is good?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And he who is in pain is evil?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. The good and evil both have joy and pain, but, perhaps, the
evil has more of them?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Then must we not infer, that the bad man is as good and bad
as the good, or, perhaps, even better?-is not this a further inference
which follows equally with the preceding from the assertion that the
good and the pleasant are the same:-can this be denied, Callicles?
  Cal. I have been listening and making admissions to you, Socrates;
and I remark that if a person grants you anything in play, you, like a
child, want to keep hold and will not give it back. But do you
really suppose that I or any other human being denies that some
pleasures are good and others bad?
  Soc. Alas, Callicles, how unfair you are! you certainly treat me
as if I were a child, sometimes saying one thing, and then another, as
if you were meaning to deceive me. And yet I thought at first that you
were my friend, and would not have deceived me if you could have
helped. But I see that I was mistaken; and now I suppose that I must
make the best of a bad business, as they said of old, and take what
I can get out of you.-Well, then, as I understand you to say, I may
assume that some pleasures are good and others evil?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. The beneficial are good, and the hurtful are evil?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. And the beneficial are those which do some good, and the
hurtful are those which do some evil?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Take, for example, the bodily pleasures of eating and drinking,
which were just now mentioning-you mean to say that those which
promote health, or any other bodily excellence, are good, and their
opposites evil?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. And in the same way there are good pains and there are evil
pains?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. And ought we not to choose and use the good pleasures and
pains?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. But not the evil?
  Cal. Clearly.
  Soc. Because, if you remember, Polus and I have agreed that all
our actions are to be done for the sake of the good-and will you agree
with us in saying, that the good is the end of all our actions, and
that all our actions are to be done for the sake of the good, and
not the good, for of them?-will you add a third vote to our two?
  Cal. I will.
  Soc. Then pleasure, like everything else, is to be sought for the
sake of that which is good, and not that which is good for the sake of
pleasure?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. But can every man choose what pleasures are good and what are
evil, or must he have art or knowledge of them in detail?
  Cal. He must have art.
  Soc. Let me now remind you of what I was saying to Gorgias and
Polus; I was saying, as you will not have forgotten, that there were
some processes which aim only at pleasure, and know nothing of a
better and worse, and there are other processes which know good and
evil. And I considered that cookery, which I do not call an art, but
only an experience, was of the former class, which is concerned with
pleasure, and that the art of medicine was of the class which is
concerned with the good. And now, by the god of friendship, I must beg
you, Callicles, not to jest, or to imagine that I am jesting with you;
do not answer at random and contrary to your real opinion-for you will
observe that we are arguing about the way of human life; and to a
man who has any sense at all, what question can be more serious than
this?-whether he should follow after that way of life to which you
exhort me, and act what you call the manly part of speaking in the
assembly, and cultivating rhetoric, and engaging in public affairs,
according to the principles now in vogue; or whether he should
pursue the life of philosophy-and in what the latter way differs
from the former. But perhaps we had better first try to distinguish
them, as I did before, and when we have come to an agreement that they
are distinct, we may proceed to consider in what they differ from
one another, and which of them we should choose. Perhaps, however, you
do not even now understand what I mean?
  Cal. No, I do not.
  Soc. Then I will explain myself more clearly: seeing that you and
I have agreed that there is such a thing as good, and that there is
such a thing as pleasure, and that pleasure is not the same as good,
and that the pursuit and process of acquisition of the one, that is
pleasure, is different from the pursuit and process of acquisition
of the other, which is good-I wish that you would tell me whether
you agree with me thus far or not-do you agree?
  Cal. I do.
  Soc. Then I will proceed, and ask whether you also agree with me,
and whether you think that I spoke the truth when I further said to
Gorgias and Polus that cookery in my opinion is only an experience,
and not an art at all; and that whereas medicine is an art, and
attends to the nature and constitution of the patient, and has
principles of action and reason in each case, cookery in attending
upon pleasure never regards either the nature or reason of that
pleasure to which she devotes herself, but goes straight to her end,
nor ever considers or calculates anything, but works by experience and
routine, and just preserves the recollection of what she has usually
done when producing pleasure. And first, I would have you consider
whether I have proved what I was saying, and then whether there are
not other similar processes which have to do with the soul-some of
them processes of art, making a provision for the soul's highest
interest-others despising the interest, and, as in the previous
case, considering only the pleasure of the soul, and how this may be
acquired, but not considering what pleasures are good or bad, and
having no other aim but to afford gratification, whether good or
bad. In my opinion, Callicles, there are such processes, and this is
the sort of thing which I term flattery, whether concerned with the
body or the soul, or whenever employed with a view to pleasure and
without any consideration of good and evil. And now I wish that you
would tell me whether you agree with us in this notion, or whether you
differ.
  Cal. I do not differ; on the contrary, I agree; for in that way I
shall soonest bring the argument to an end, and shall oblige my friend
Gorgias.
  Soc. And is this notion true of one soul, or of two or more?
  Cal. Equally true of two or more.
  Soc. Then a man may delight a whole assembly, and yet have no regard
for their true interests?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Can you tell me the pursuits which delight mankind-or rather,
if you would prefer, let me ask, and do you answer, which of them
belong to the pleasurable class, and which of them not? In the first
place, what say you of flute-playing? Does not that appear to be an
art which seeks only pleasure, Callicles, and thinks of nothing else?
  Cal. I assent.
  Soc. And is not the same true of all similar arts, as, for
example, the art of playing the lyre at festivals?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And what do you say of the choral art and of dithyrambic
poetry?-are not they of the same nature? Do you imagine that
Cinesias the son of Meles cares about what will tend to the moral
improvement of his hearers, or about what will give pleasure to the
multitude?
  Cal. There can be no mistake about Cinesias, Socrates.
  Soc. And what do you say of his father, Meles the harp-player? Did
he perform with any view to the good of his hearers? Could he be
said to regard even their pleasure? For his singing was an
infliction to his audience. And of harp playing and dithyrambic poetry
in general, what would you say? Have they not been invented wholly for
the sake of pleasure?
  Cal. That is my notion of them.
  Soc. And as for the Muse of Tragedy, that solemn and august
personage-what are her aspirations? Is all her aim and desire only
to give pleasure to the spectators, or does she fight against them and
refuse to speak of their pleasant vices, and willingly proclaim in
word and song truths welcome and unwelcome?-which in your judgment
is her character?
  Cal. There can be no doubt, Socrates, that Tragedy has her face
turned towards pleasure and the gratification of the audience.
  Soc. And is not that the sort of thing, Callicles, which we were
just now describing as flattery?
  Cal. Quite true.
  Soc. Well now, suppose that we strip all poetry of song and rhythm
and metre, there will remain speech?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. And this speech is addressed to a crowd of people?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Then, poetry is a sort of rhetoric?
  Cal. True.
  Soc. And do not the poets in the theatres seem to you to be
rhetoricians?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Then now we have discovered a sort of rhetoric which is
addressed to a crowd of men, women, and children, freemen and
slaves. And this is not much to our taste, for we have described it as
having the nature of flattery.
  Cal. Quite true.
  Soc. Very good. And what do you say of that other rhetoric which
addresses the Athenian assembly and the assemblies of freemen in other
states? Do the rhetoricians appear to you always to aim at what is
best, and do they seek to improve the citizens by their speeches, or
are they too, like the rest of mankind, bent upon giving them
pleasure, forgetting the public good in the thought of their own
interest, playing with the people as with children, and trying to
amuse them, but never considering whether they are better or worse for
this?
  Cal. I must distinguish. There are some who have a real care of
the public in what they say, while others are such as you describe.
  Soc. I am contented with the admission that rhetoric is of two
sorts; one, which is mere flattery and disgraceful declamation; the
other, which is noble and aims at the training and improvement of
the souls of the citizens, and strives to say what is best, whether
welcome or unwelcome, to the audience; but have you ever known such
a rhetoric; or if you have, and can point out any rhetorician who is
of this stamp, who is he?
  Cal. But, indeed, I am afraid that I cannot tell you of any such
among the orators who are at present living.
  Soc. Well, then, can you mention any one of a former generation, who
may be said to have improved the Athenians, who found them worse and
made them better, from the day that he began to make speeches? for,
indeed, I do not know of such a man.
  Cal. What! did you never hear that Themistocles was a good man,
and Cimon and Miltiades and Pericles, who is just lately dead, and
whom you heard yourself?
  Soc. Yes, Callicles, they were good men, if, as you said at first,
true virtue consists only in the satisfaction of our own desires and
those of others; but if not, and if, as we were afterwards compelled
to acknowledge, the satisfaction of some desires makes us better,
and of others, worse, and we ought to gratify the one and not the
other, and there is an art in distinguishing them-can you tell me of
any of these statesmen who did distinguish them?
  Cal. No, indeed, I cannot.
  Soc. Yet, surely, Callicles, if you look you will find such a one.
Suppose that we just calmly consider whether any of these was such
as I have described. Will not the good man, who says whatever he
says with a view to the best, speak with a reference to some
standard and not at random; just as all other artists, whether the
painter, the builder, the shipwright, or any other look all of them to
their own work, and do not select and apply at random what they apply,
but strive to give a definite form to it? The artist disposes all
things in order, and compels the one part to harmonize and accord with
the other part, until he has constructed a regular and systematic
whole; and this is true of all artists, and in the same way the
trainers and physicians, of whom we spoke before, give order and
regularity to the body: do you deny this?
  Cal. No; I am ready to admit it.
  Soc. Then the house in which order and regularity prevail is good,
that in which there is disorder, evil?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And the same is true of a ship?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And the same may be said of the human body?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And what would you say of the soul? Will the good soul be
that in which disorder is prevalent, or that in which there is harmony
and order?
  Cal. The latter follows from our previous admissions.
  Soc. What is the name which is given to the effect of harmony and
order in the body?
  Cal. I suppose that you mean health and strength?
  Soc. Yes, I do; and what is the name which you would give to the
effect of harmony and order in the soul? Try and discover a name for
this as well as for the other.
  Cal. Why not give the name yourself, Socrates?
  Soc. Well, if you had rather that I should, I will; and you shall
say whether you agree with me, and if not, you shall refute and answer
me. "Healthy," as I conceive, is the name which is given to the
regular order of the body, whence comes health and every other
bodily excellence: is that true or not?
  Cal. True.
  Soc. And "lawful" and "law" are the names which are given to the
regular order and action of the soul, and these make men lawful and
orderly:-and so we have temperance and justice: have we not?
  Cal. Granted.
  Soc. And will not the true rhetorician who is honest and understands
his art have his eye fixed upon these, in all the words which he
addresses to the souls of men, and in all his actions, both in what he
gives and in what he takes away? Will not his aim be to implant
justice in the souls of his citizens mind take away injustice, to
implant temperance and take away intemperance, to implant every virtue
and take away every vice? Do you not agree?
  Cal. I agree.
  Soc. For what use is there, Callicles, in giving to the body of a
sick man who is in a bad state of health a quantity of the most
delightful food or drink or any other pleasant thing, which may be
really as bad for him as if you gave him nothing, or even worse if
rightly estimated. Is not that true?
  Cal. I will not say No to it.
  Soc. For in my opinion there is no profit in a man's life if his
body is in an evil plight-in that case his life also is evil: am I not
right?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. When a man is in health the physicians will generally allow him
to eat when he is hungry and drink when he is thirsty, and to
satisfy his desires as he likes, but when he is sick they hardly
suffer him to satisfy his desires at all: even you will admit that?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And does not the same argument hold of the soul, my good sir?
While she is in a bad state and is senseless and intemperate and
unjust and unholy, her desires ought to be controlled, and she ought
to be prevented from doing anything which does not tend to her own
improvement.
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Such treatment will be better for the soul herself?
  Cal. To be sure.
  Soc. And to restrain her from her appetites is to chastise her?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. Then restraint or chastisement is better for the soul than
intemperance or the-absence of control, which you were just now
preferring?
  Cal. I do not understand you, Socrates, and I wish that you would
ask some one who does.
  Soc. Here is a gentleman who cannot endure to be improved or: to
subject himself to that very chastisement of which the argument
speaks!
  Cal. I do not heed a word of what you are saying, and have only
answered hitherto out of civility to Gorgias.
  Soc. What are we to do, then? Shall we break off in the middle?
  Cal. You shall judge for yourself.
  Soc. Well, but people say that "a tale should have a head and not
break off in the middle," and I should not like to have the argument
going about without a head; please then to go on a little longer,
and put the head on.
  Cal. How tyrannical you are, Socrates! I wish that you and your
argument would rest, or that you would get some one else to argue with
you.
  Soc. But who else is willing?-I want to finish the argument.
  Cal. Cannot you finish without my help, either talking straight: on,
or questioning and answering yourself?
  Soc. Must I then say with Epicharmus, "Two men spoke before, but now
one shall be enough"? I suppose that there is absolutely no help.
And if I am to carry on the enquiry by myself, I will first of all
remark that not only, but all of us should have an ambition to know
what is true and what is false in this matter, for the discovery of
the truth is common good. And now I will proceed to argue according to
my own notion. But if any of you think that I arrive at conclusions
which are untrue you must interpose and refute me, for I do not
speak from any knowledge of what I am saying; I am an enquirer like
yourselves, and therefore, if my opponent says anything which is of
force, I shall be the first to agree with him. I am speaking on the
supposition that the argument ought to be completed; but if you
think otherwise let us leave off and go our ways.
  Gor. I think, Socrates, that we should not go our ways until you
have completed the argument; and this appears to me to be the wish
of the rest of the company; I myself should very much like to hear
what more you have to say.
  Soc. I too, Gorgias, should have liked to continue the argument with
Callicles, and then I might have given him an "Amphion" in return
for his "Zethus"; but since you, Callicles, are unwilling to continue,
I hope that you will listen, and interrupt me if I seem to you to be
in error. And if you refute me, I shall not be angry with you as you
are with me, but I shall inscribe you as the greatest of benefactors
on the tablets of my soul.
  Cal. My good fellow, never mind me, but get on.
  Soc. Listen to me, then, while I recapitulate the argument:-Is the
pleasant the same as the good? Not the same. Callicles and I are
agreed about that. And is the pleasant to be pursued for the sake of
the good? or the good for the sake of the pleasant? The pleasant is to
be pursued for the sake of the good. And that is pleasant at the
presence of which we are pleased, and that is good at the presence
of which we are good? To be sure. And we-good, and all good things
whatever are good when some virtue is present in us or them? That,
Callicles, is my conviction. But the virtue of each thing, whether
body or soul, instrument or creature, when given to them in the best
way comes to them not by chance but as the result of the order and
truth and art which are imparted to them: Am I not right? I maintain
that I am. And is not the virtue of each thing dependent on order or
arrangement? Yes, I say. And that which makes a thing good is the
proper order inhering in each thing? Such is my view. And is not the
soul which has an order of her own better than that which has no
order? Certainly. And the soul which has order is orderly? Of
course. And that which is orderly is temperate? Assuredly. And the
temperate soul is good? No other answer can I give, Callicles dear;
have you any?
  Cal. Go on, my good fellow.
  Soc. Then I shall proceed to add, that if the, temperate soul is the
good soul, the soul which is in the opposite condition, that is, the
foolish and intemperate, is the bad soul. Very true.
  And will not the temperate man do what is proper, both in relation
to the gods and to men; -for he would not be temperate if he did
not? Certainly he will do what is proper. In his relation to other men
he will do what is just; See and in his relation to the gods he will
do what is holy; and he who does what is just and holy must be just
and holy? Very true. And must he not be courageous? for the duty of
a temperate man is not to follow or to avoid what he ought not, but
what he ought, whether things or men or pleasures or pains, and
patiently to endure when he ought; and therefore, Callicles, the
temperate man, being, as we have described, also just and courageous
and holy, cannot be other than a perfectly good man, nor can the
good man do otherwise than well and perfectly whatever he does; and he
who does well must of necessity be happy and blessed, and the evil man
who does evil, miserable: now this latter is he whom you were
applauding-the intemperate who is the opposite of the temperate.
Such is my position, and these things I affirm to be true. And if they
are true, then I further affirm that he who desires to be happy must
pursue and practise temperance and run away from intemperance as
fast as his legs will carry him: he had better order his life so as
not to need punishment; but if either he or any of his friends,
whether private individual or city, are in need of punishment, then
justice must be done and he must suffer punishment, if he would be
happy. This appears to me to be the aim which a man ought to have, and
towards which he ought to direct all the energies both of himself
and of the state, acting so that he may have temperance and justice
present with him and be happy, not suffering his lusts to be
unrestrained, and in the never-ending desire satisfy them leading a
robber's life. Such; one is the friend neither of God nor man, for
he is incapable of communion, and he who is incapable of communion
is also incapable of friendship. And philosophers tell us,
Callicles, that communion and friendship and orderliness and
temperance and justice bind together heaven and earth and gods and
men, and that this universe is therefore called Cosmos or order, not
disorder or misrule, my friend. But although you are a philosopher you
seem to me never to have observed that geometrical equality is mighty,
both among gods and men; you think that you ought to cultivate
inequality or excess, and do not care about geometry.-Well, then,
either the principle that the happy are made happy by the possession
of justice and temperance, and the miserable the possession of vice,
must be refuted, or, if it is granted, what will be the
consequences? All the consequences which I drew before, Callicles, and
about which you asked me whether I was in earnest when I said that a
man ought to accuse himself and his son and his friend if he did
anything wrong, and that to this end he should use his rhetoric-all
those consequences are true. And that which you thought that Polus was
led to admit out of modesty is true, viz., that, to do injustice, if
more disgraceful than to suffer, is in that degree worse; and the
other position, which, according to Polus, Gorgias admitted out of
modesty, that he who would truly be a rhetorician ought to be just and
have a knowledge of justice, has also turned out to be true.
  And now, these things being as we have said, let us proceed in the
next place to consider whether you are right in throwing in my teeth
that I am unable to help myself or any of my friends or kinsmen, or to
save them in the extremity of danger, and that I am in the power of
another like an outlaw to whom anyone may do what he likes-he may
box my ears, which was a brave saying of yours; or take away my
goods or banish me, or even do his worst and kill me; a condition
which, as you say, is the height of disgrace. My answer to you is
one which has been already often repeated, but may as well be repeated
once more. I tell you, Callicles, that to be boxed on the ears
wrongfully is not the worst evil which can befall a man, nor to have
my purse or my body cut open, but that to smite and slay me and mine
wrongfully is far more disgraceful and more evil; aye, and to
despoil and enslave and pillage, or in any way at all to wrong me
and mine, is far more disgraceful and evil to the doer of the wrong
than to me who am the sufferer. These truths, which have been
already set forth as I state them in the previous discussion, would
seem now to have been fixed and riveted by us, if I may use an
expression which is certainly bold, in words which are like bonds of
iron and adamant; and unless you or some other still more enterprising
hero shall break them, there is no possibility of denying what I
say. For my position has always been, that I myself am ignorant how
these things are, but that I have never met any one who could say
otherwise, any more than you can, and not appear ridiculous. This is
my position still, and if what I am saying is true, and injustice is
the greatest of evils to the doer of injustice, and yet there is if
possible a greater than this greatest of evils, in an unjust man not
suffering retribution, what is that defence of which the want will
make a man truly ridiculous? Must not the defence be one which will
avert the greatest of human evils? And will not worst of all
defences be that with which a man is unable to defend himself or his
family or his friends?-and next will come that which is unable to
avert the next greatest evil; thirdly that which is unable to avert
the third greatest evil; and so of other evils. As is the greatness of
evil so is the honour of being able to avert them in their several
degrees, and the disgrace of not being able to avert them. Am I not
right Callicles?
  Cal. Yes, quite right.
  Soc. Seeing then that there are these two evils, the doing injustice
and the suffering injustice-and we affirm that to do injustice is a
greater, and to suffer injustice a lesser evil-by what devices can a
man succeed in obtaining the two advantages, the one of not doing
and the other of not suffering injustice? must he have the power, or
only the will to obtain them? I mean to ask whether a man will
escape injustice if he has only the will to escape, or must he have
provided himself with the power?
  Cal. He must have provided himself with the power; that is clear.
  Soc. And what do you say of doing injustice? Is the will only
sufficient, and will that prevent him from doing injustice, or must he
have provided himself with power and art; and if he has not studied
and practised, will he be unjust still? Surely you might say,
Callicles, whether you think that Polus and I were right in
admitting the conclusion that no one does wrong voluntarily, but
that all do wrong against their will?
  Cal. Granted, Socrates, if you will only have done.
  Soc. Then, as would appear, power and art have to be provided in
order that we may do no injustice?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. And what art will protect us from suffering injustice, if not
wholly, yet as far as possible? I want to know whether you agree
with me; for I think that such an art is the art of one who is
either a ruler or even tyrant himself, or the equal and companion of
the ruling power.
  Cal. Well said, Socrates; and please to observe how ready I am to
praise you when you talk sense.
  Soc. Think and tell me whether you would approve of another view
of mine: To me every man appears to be most the friend of him who is
most like to him-like to like, as ancient sages say: Would you not
agree to this?
  Cal. I should.
  Soc. But when the tyrant is rude and uneducated, he may be
expected to fear any one who is his superior in virtue, and will never
be able to be perfectly friendly with him.
  Cal. That is true.
  Soc. Neither will he be the friend of any one who greatly his
inferior, for the tyrant will despise him, and will never seriously
regard him as a friend.
  Cal. That again is true.
  Soc. Then the only friend worth mentioning, whom the tyrant can
have, will be one who is of the same character, and has the same likes
and dislikes, and is at the same time willing to be subject and
subservient to him; he is the man who will have power in the state,
and no one will injure him with impunity:-is not that so?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And if a young man begins to ask how he may become great and
formidable, this would seem to be the way-he will accustom himself,
from his youth upward, to feel sorrow and joy on, the same occasions
as his master, and will contrive to be as like him as possible?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And in this way he will have accomplished, as you and your
friends would. say, the end of becoming a great man and not
suffering injury?
  Cal. Very true.
  Soc. But will he also escape from doing injury? Must not the very
opposite be true,-if he is to be like the tyrant in his injustice, and
to have influence with him? Will he not rather contrive to do as
much wrong as possible, and not be punished?
  Cal. True.
  Soc. And by the imitation of his master and by the power which he
thus acquires will not his soul become bad and corrupted, and will not
this be the greatest evil to him?
  Cal. You always contrive somehow or other, Socrates, to invert
everything: do you not know that he who imitates the tyrant will, if
he has a mind, kill him who does not imitate him and take away his
goods?
  Soc. Excellent Callicles, I am not deaf, and I have heard that a
great many times from you and from Polus and from nearly every man
in the city, but I wish that you would hear me too. I dare say that he
will kill him if he has a mind-the bad man will kill the good and
true.
  Cal. And is not that just the provoking thing?
  Soc. Nay, not to a man of sense, as the argument shows: do you think
that all our cares should be directed to prolonging life to the
uttermost, and to the study of those arts which secure us from
danger always; like that art of rhetoric which saves men in courts
of law, and which you advise me to cultivate?
  Cal. Yes, truly, and very good advice too.
  Soc. Well, my friend, but what do you think of swimming; is that
an art of any great pretensions?
  Cal. No, indeed.
  Soc. And yet surely swimming saves a man from death, there are
occasions on which he must know how to swim. And if you despise the
swimmers, I will tell you of another and greater art, the art of the
pilot, who not only saves the souls of men, but also their bodies
and properties from the extremity of danger, just like rhetoric. Yet
his art is modest and unpresuming: it has no airs or pretences of
doing anything extraordinary, and, in return for the same salvation
which is given by the pleader, demands only two obols, if he brings us
from Aegina to Athens, or for the longer voyage from Pontus or
Egypt, at the utmost two drachmae, when he has saved, as I was just
now saying, the passenger and his wife and children and goods, and
safely disembarked them at the Piraeus -this is the payment which he
asks in return for so great a boon; and he who is the master of the
art, and has done all this, gets out and walks about on the
sea-shore by his ship in an unassuming way. For he is able to
reflect and is aware that he cannot tell which of his
fellow-passengers he has benefited, and which of them he has injured
in not allowing them to be drowned. He knows that they are just the
same when he has disembarked them as when they embarked, and not a
whit better either in their bodies or in their souls; and he considers
that if a man who is afflicted by great and incurable bodily
diseases is only to be pitied for having escaped, and is in no way
benefited by him in having been saved from drowning, much less he
who has great and incurable diseases, not of the body, but of the
soul, which is the more valuable part of him; neither is life worth
having nor of any profit to the bad man, whether he be delivered
from the sea, or the law-courts, or any other devourer-and so he
reflects that such a one had better not live, for he cannot live well.
  And this is the reason why the pilot, although he is our saviour, is
not usually conceited, any more than the engineer, who is not at all
behind either the general, or the pilot, or any one else, in his
saving power, for he sometimes saves whole cities. Is there any
comparison between him and the pleader? And if he were to talk,
Callicles, in your grandiose style, he would bury you under a mountain
of words, declaring and insisting that we ought all of us to be
engine-makers, and that no other profession is worth thinking about;
he would have plenty to say. Nevertheless you despise him and his art,
and sneeringly call him an engine-maker, and you will not allow your
daughters to marry his son, or marry your son to his daughters. And
yet, on your principle, what justice or reason is there in your
refusal? What right have you to despise the engine-maker, and the
others whom I was just now mentioning? I know that you will say, "I am
better, better born." But if the better is not what I say, and
virtue consists only in a man saving himself and his, whatever may
be his character, then your censure of the engine-maker, and of the
physician, and of the other arts of salvation, is ridiculous. O my
friend! I want you to see that the noble and the good may possibly
be something different from saving and being saved:-May not he who
is truly a man cease to care about living a certain time?-he knows, as
women say, that no man can escape fate, and therefore he is not fond
of life; he leaves all that with God, and considers in what way he can
best spend his appointed term-whether by assimilating himself to the
constitution under which he lives, as you at this moment have to
consider how you may become as like as possible to the Athenian
people, if you mean to be in their good graces, and to have power in
the state; whereas I want you to think and see whether this is for the
interest of either of us-I would not have us risk that which is
dearest on the acquisition of this power, like the Thessalian
enchantresses, who, as they say, bring down the moon from heaven at
the risk of their own perdition. But if you suppose that any man
will show you the art of becoming great in the city, and yet not
conforming yourself to the ways of the city, whether for better or
worse, then I can only say that you are mistaken, Callides; for he who
would deserve to be the true natural friend of the Athenian Demus,
aye, or of Pyrilampes' darling who is called after them, must be by
nature like them, and not an imitator only. He, then, who will make
you most like them, will make you as you desire, a statesman and
orator: for every man is pleased when he is spoken to in his own
language and spirit, and dislikes any other. But perhaps you, sweet
Callicles, may be of another mind. What do you say?
  Cal. Somehow or other your words, Socrates, always appear to me to
be good words; and yet, like the rest of the world, I am not quite
convinced by them.
  Soc. The reason is, Callicles, that the love of Demus which abides
in your soul is an adversary to me; but I dare say that if we recur to
these same matters, and consider them more thoroughly, you may be
convinced for all that. Please, then, to remember that there are two
processes of training all things, including body and soul; in the one,
as we said, we treat them with a view to pleasure, and in the other
with a view to the highest good, and then we do not indulge but resist
them: was not that the distinction which we drew?
  Cal. Very true.
  Soc. And the one which had pleasure in view was just a vulgar
flattery:-was not that another of our conclusions?
  Cal. Be it so, if you will have it.
  Soc. And the other had in view the greatest improvement of that
which was ministered to, whether body or soul?
  Cal. Quite true.
  Soc. And must we not have the same end in view in the treatment of
our city and citizens? Must we not try and make-them as good as
possible? For we have already discovered that there is no use in
imparting to them any other good, unless the mind of those who are
to have the good, whether money, or office, or any other sort of
power, be gentle and good. Shall we say that?
  Cal. Yes, certainly, if you like.
  Soc. Well, then, if you and I, Callicles, were intending to set
about some public business, and were advising one another to undertake
buildings, such as walls, docks or temples of the largest size,
ought we not to examine ourselves, first, as to whether we know or
do not know the art of building, and who taught us?-would not that
be necessary, Callicles?
  Cal. True.
  Soc. In the second place, we should have to consider whether we
had ever constructed any private house, either of our own or for our
friends, and whether this building of ours was a success or not; and
if upon consideration we found that we had had good and eminent
masters, and had been successful in constructing many fine
buildings, not only with their assistance, but without them, by our
own unaided skill-in that case prudence would not dissuade us from
proceeding to the construction of public works. But if we had no
master to show, and only a number of worthless buildings or none at
all, then, surely, it would be ridiculous in us to attempt public
works, or to advise one another to undertake them. Is not this true?
  Cal. Certainly.
  Soc. And does not the same hold in all other cases? If you and I
were physicians, and were advising one another that we were
competent to practise as state-physicians, should I not ask about you,
and would you not ask about me, Well, but how about Socrates
himself, has he good health? and was any one else ever known to be
cured by him, whether slave or freeman? And I should make the same
enquiries about you. And if we arrived at the conclusion that no
one, whether citizen or stranger, man or woman, had ever been any
the better for the medical skill of either of us, then, by Heaven,
Callicles, what an absurdity to think that we or any human being
should be so silly as to set up as state-physicians and advise
others like ourselves to do the same, without having first practised
in private, whether successfully or not, and acquired experience of
the art! Is not this, as they say, to begin with the big jar when
you are learning the potter's art; which is a foolish thing?
  Cal. True.
  Soc. And now, my friend, as you are already beginning to be a public
character, and are admonishing and reproaching me for not being one,
suppose that we ask a few questions of one another. Tell me, then,
Callicles, how about making any of the citizens better? Was there ever
a man who was once vicious, or unjust, or intemperate, or foolish, and
became by the help of Callicles good and noble? Was there ever such
a man, whether citizen or stranger, slave or freeman? Tell me,
Callicles, if a person were to ask these questions of you, what
would you answer? Whom would you say that-you had improved by your
conversation? There may have been good deeds of this sort which were
done by you as a private person, before you came forward in public.
Why will you not answer?
  Cal. You are contentious, Socrates.
  Soc. Nay, I ask you, not from a love of contention, but because I
really want to know in what way you think that affairs should be
administered among us-whether, when you come to the administration
of them, you have any other aim but the improvement of the citizens?
Have we not already admitted many times over that such is the duty
of a public man? Nay, we have surely said so; for if you will not
answer for yourself I must answer for you. But if this is what the
good man ought to effect for the benefit of his own state, allow me to
recall to you the names of those whom you were just now mentioning,
Pericles, and Cimon, and Miltiades, and Themistocles, and ask
whether you still think that they were good citizens.
  Cal. I do.
  Soc. But if they were good, then clearly each of them must have made
the citizens better instead of worse?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And, therefore, when Pericles first began to speak in the
assembly, the Athenians were not so good as when he spoke last?
  Cal. Very likely.
  Soc. Nay, my friend, "likely" is not the word; for if he was a
good citizen, the inference is certain.
  Cal. And what difference does that make?
  Soc. None; only I should like further to know whether the
Athenians are supposed to have been made better by Pericles, or, on
the contrary, to have been corrupted by him; for I hear that he was
the first who gave the people pay, and made them idle and cowardly,
and encouraged them in the love of talk and money.
  Cal. You heard that, Socrates, from the laconising set who bruise
their ears.
  Soc. But what I am going to tell you now is not mere hearsay, but
well known both to you and me: that at first, Pericles was glorious
and his character unimpeached by any verdict of the Athenians-this was
during the time when they were not so good-yet afterwards, when they
had been made good and gentle by him, at the very end of his life they
convicted him of theft, and almost put him to death, clearly under the
notion that he was a malefactor.
  Cal. Well, but how does that prove Pericles' badness?
  Soc. Why, surely you would say that he was a bad manager of asses or
horses or oxen, who had received them originally neither kicking nor
butting nor biting him, and implanted in them all these savage tricks?
Would he not be a bad manager of any animals who received them gentle,
and made them fiercer than they were when he received them? What do
you say?
  Cal. I will do you the favour of saying "yes."
  Soc. And will you also do me the favour of saying whether man is
an animal?
  Cal. Certainly he is.
  Soc. And was not Pericles a shepherd of men?
  Cal. Yes.
  Soc. And if he was a good political shepherd, ought not the
animals who were his subjects, as we were just now acknowledging, to
have become more just, and not more unjust?
  Cal. Quite true.
  Soc. And are not just men gentle, as Homer says?-or are you of
another mind?
  Cal. I agree.
  Soc. And yet he really did make them more savage than he received
them, and their savageness was shown towards himself; which he must
have been very far from desiring.
  Cal. Do you want me to agree with you?
  Soc. Yes, if I seem to you to speak the truth.
  Cal. Granted then.
  Soc. And if they were more savage, must they not have been more
unjust and inferior?
  Cal. Granted again.
  Soc. Then upon this view, Pericles was not a good statesman?
  Cal. That is, upon your view.
  Soc. Nay, the view is yours, after what you have admitted. Take
the case of Cimon again. Did not the very persons whom he was
serving ostracize him, in order that they might not hear his voi                                     380 BC
                                      MENO
                                    by Plato
                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
MENO

  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE MENO; SOCRATES; A SLAVE OF MENO;
ANYTUS

  Meno. Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired by
teaching or by practice; or if neither by teaching nor practice,
then whether it comes to man by nature, or in what other way?
  Socrates. O Meno, there was a time when the Thessalians were
famous among the other Hellenes only for their riches and their
riding; but now, if I am not mistaken, they are equally famous for
their wisdom, especially at Larisa, which is the native city of your
friend Aristippus. And this is Gorgias' doing; for when he came there,
the flower of the Aleuadae, among them your admirer Aristippus, and
the other chiefs of the Thessalians, fell in love with his wisdom. And
he has taught you the habit of answering questions in a grand and bold
style, which becomes those who know, and is the style in which he
himself answers all comers; and any Hellene who likes may ask him
anything. How different is our lot! my dear Meno. Here at Athens there
is a dearth of the commodity, and all wisdom seems to have emigrated
from us to you. I am certain that if you were to ask any Athenian
whether virtue was natural or acquired, he would laugh in your face,
and say: "Stranger, you have far too good an opinion of me, if you
think that I can answer your question. For I literally do not know
what virtue is, and much less whether it is acquired by teaching or
not." And I myself, Meno, living as I do in this region of poverty, am
as poor as the rest of the world; and I confess with shame that I know
literally nothing about virtue; and when I do not know the "quid" of
anything how can I know the "quale"? How, if I knew nothing at all
of Meno, could I tell if he was fair, or the opposite of fair; rich
and noble, or the reverse of rich and noble? Do you think that I
could?
  Men. No, Indeed. But are you in earnest, Socrates, in saying that
you do not know what virtue is? And am I to carry back this report
of you to Thessaly?
  Soc. Not only that, my dear boy, but you may say further that I have
never known of any one else who did, in my judgment.
  Men. Then you have never met Gorgias when he was at Athens?
  Soc. Yes, I have.
  Men. And did you not think that he knew?
  Soc. I have not a good memory, Meno, and therefore I cannot now tell
what I thought of him at the time. And I dare say that he did know,
and that you know what he said: please, therefore, to remind me of
what he said; or, if you would rather, tell me your own view; for I
suspect that you and he think much alike.
  Men. Very true.
  Soc. Then as he is not here, never mind him, and do you tell me:
By the gods, Meno, be generous, and tell me what you say that virtue
is; for I shall be truly delighted to find that I have been
mistaken, and that you and Gorgias do really have this knowledge;
although I have been just saying that I have never found anybody who
had.
  Men. There will be no difficulty, Socrates, in answering your
question. Let us take first the virtue of a man-he should know how
to administer the state, and in the administration of it to benefit
his friends and harm his enemies; and he must also be careful not to
suffer harm himself. A woman's virtue, if you wish to know about that,
may also be easily described: her duty is to order her house, and keep
what is indoors, and obey her husband. Every age, every condition of
life, young or old, male or female, bond or free, has a different
virtue: there are virtues numberless, and no lack of definitions of
them; for virtue is relative to the actions and ages of each of us
in all that we do. And the same may be said of vice, Socrates.
  Soc. How fortunate I am, Meno! When I ask you for one virtue, you
present me with a swarm of them, which are in your keeping. Suppose
that I carry on the figure of the swarm, and ask of you, What is the
nature of the bee? and you answer that there are many kinds of bees,
and I reply: But do bees differ as bees, because there are many and
different kinds of them; or are they not rather to be distinguished by
some other quality, as for example beauty, size, or shape? How would
you answer me?
  Men. I should answer that bees do not differ from one another, as
bees.
  Soc. And if I went on to say: That is what I desire to know, Meno;
tell me what is the quality in which they do not differ, but are all
alike;-would you be able to answer?
  Men. I should.
  Soc. And so of the virtues, however many and different they may
be, they have all a common nature which makes them virtues; and on
this he who would answer the question, "What is virtue?" would do well
to have his eye fixed: Do you understand?
  Men. I am beginning to understand; but I do not as yet take hold
of the question as I could wish.
  Soc. When you say, Meno, that there is one virtue of a man,
another of a woman, another of a child, and so on, does this apply
only to virtue, or would you say the same of health, and size, and
strength? Or is the nature of health always the same, whether in man
or woman?
  Men. I should say that health is the same, both in man and woman.
  Soc. And is not this true of size and strength? If a woman is
strong, she will be strong by reason of the same form and of the
same strength subsisting in her which there is in the man. I mean to
say that strength, as strength, whether of man or woman, is the
same. Is there any difference?
  Men. I think not.
  Soc. And will not virtue, as virtue, be the same, whether in a child
or in a grown-up person, in a woman or in a man?
  Men. I cannot help feeling, Socrates, that this case is different
from the others.
  Soc. But why? Were you not saying that the virtue of a man was to
order a state, and the virtue of a woman was to order a house?
  Men. I did say so.
  Soc. And can either house or state or anything be well ordered
without temperance and without justice?
  Men. Certainly not.
  Soc. Then they who order a state or a house temperately or justly
order them with temperance and justice?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Then both men and women, if they are to be good men and
women, must have the same virtues of temperance and justice?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And can either a young man or an elder one be good, if they are
intemperate and unjust?
  Men. They cannot.
  Soc. They must be temperate and just?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Then all men are good in the same way, and by participation
in the same virtues?
  Men. Such is the inference.
  Soc. And they surely would not have been good in the same way,
unless their virtue had been the same?
  Men. They would not.
  Soc. Then now that the sameness of all virtue has been proven, try
and remember what you and Gorgias say that virtue is.
  Men. Will you have one definition of them all?
  Soc. That is what I am seeking.
  Men. If you want to have one definition of them all, I know not what
to say, but that virtue is the power of governing mankind.
  Soc. And does this definition of virtue include all virtue? Is
virtue the same in a child and in a slave, Meno? Can the child
govern his father, or the slave his master; and would he who
governed be any longer a slave?
  Men. I think not, Socrates.
  Soc. No, indeed; there would be small reason in that. Yet once more,
fair friend; according to you, virtue is "the power of governing"; but
do you not add "justly and not unjustly"?
  Men. Yes, Socrates; I agree there; for justice is virtue.
  Soc. Would you say "virtue," Meno, or "a virtue"?
  Men. What do you mean?
  Soc. I mean as I might say about anything; that a round, for
example, is "a figure" and not simply "figure," and I should adopt
this mode of speaking, because there are other figures.
  Men. Quite right; and that is just what I am saying about
virtue-that there are other virtues as well as justice.
  Soc. What are they? tell me the names of them, as I would tell you
the names of the other figures if you asked me.
  Men. Courage and temperance and wisdom and magnanimity are
virtues; and there are many others.
  Soc. Yes, Meno; and again we are in the same case: in searching
after one virtue we have found many, though not in the same way as
before; but we have been unable to find the common virtue which runs
through them all.
  Men. Why, Socrates, even now I am not able to follow you in the
attempt to get at one common notion of virtue as of other things.
  Soc. No wonder; but I will try to get nearer if I can, for you
know that all things have a common notion. Suppose now that some one
asked you the question which I asked before: Meno, he would say,
what is figure? And if you answered "roundness," he would reply to
you, in my way of speaking, by asking whether you would say that
roundness is "figure" or "a figure"; and you would answer "a figure."
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And for this reason-that there are other figures?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And if he proceeded to ask, What other figures are there? you
would have told him.
  Men. I should.
  Soc. And if he similarly asked what colour is, and you answered
whiteness, and the questioner rejoined, Would you say that whiteness
is colour or a colour? you would reply, A colour, because there are
other colours as well.
  Men. I should.
  Soc. And if he had said, Tell me what they are?-you would have
told him of other colours which are colours just as much as whiteness.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And suppose that he were to pursue the matter in my way, he
would say: Ever and anon we are landed in particulars, but this is not
what I want; tell me then, since you call them by a common name, and
say that they are all figures, even when opposed to one another,
what is that common nature which you designate as figure-which
contains straight as well as round, and is no more one than the
other-that would be your mode of speaking?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And in speaking thus, you do not mean to say that the round
is round any more than straight, or the straight any more straight
than round?
  Men. Certainly not.
  Soc. You only assert that the round figure is not more a figure than
the straight, or the straight than the round?
  Men. Very true.
  Soc. To what then do we give the name of figure? Try and answer.
Suppose that when a person asked you this question either about figure
or colour, you were to reply, Man, I do not understand what you
want, or know what you are saying; he would look rather astonished and
say: Do you not understand that I am looking for the "simile in
multis"? And then he might put the question in another form: Mono,
he might say, what is that "simile in multis" which you call figure,
and which includes not only round and straight figures, but all? Could
you not answer that question, Meno? I wish that you would try; the
attempt will be good practice with a view to the answer about virtue.
  Men. I would rather that you should answer, Socrates.
  Soc. Shall I indulge you?
  Men. By all means.
  Soc. And then you will tell me about virtue?
  Men. I will.
  Soc. Then I must do my best, for there is a prize to be won.
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Well, I will try and explain to you what figure is. What do you
say to this answer?-Figure is the only thing which always follows
colour. Will you be satisfied with it, as I am sure that I should
be, if you would let me have a similar definition of virtue?
  Men. But, Socrates, it is such a simple answer.
  Soc. Why simple?
  Men. Because, according to you, figure is that which always
follows colour.
  (Soc. Granted.)
  Men. But if a person were to say that he does not know what colour
is, any more than what figure is-what sort of answer would you have
given him?
  Soc. I should have told him the truth. And if he were a
philosopher of the eristic and antagonistic sort, I should say to him:
You have my answer, and if I am wrong, your business is to take up the
argument and refute me. But if we were friends, and were talking as
you and I are now, I should reply in a milder strain and more in the
dialectician's vein; that is to say, I should not only speak the
truth, but I should make use of premisses which the person
interrogated would be willing to admit. And this is the way in which I
shall endeavour to approach you. You will acknowledge, will you not,
that there is such a thing as an end, or termination, or
extremity?-all which words use in the same sense, although I am
aware that Prodicus might draw distinctions about them: but still you,
I am sure, would speak of a thing as ended or terminated-that is all
which I am saying-not anything very difficult.
  Men. Yes, I should; and I believe that I understand your meaning.
  Soc. And you would speak of a surface and also of a solid, as for
example in geometry.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Well then, you are now in a condition to understand my
definition of figure. I define figure to be that in which the solid
ends; or, more concisely, the limit of solid.
  Men. And now, Socrates, what is colour?
  Soc. You are outrageous, Meno, in thus plaguing a poor old man to
give you an answer, when you will not take the trouble of
remembering what is Gorgias' definition of virtue.
  Men. When you have told me what I ask, I will tell you, Socrates.
  Soc. A man who was blindfolded has only to hear you talking, and
he would know that you are a fair creature and have still many lovers.
  Men. Why do you think so?
  Soc. Why, because you always speak in imperatives: like all beauties
when they are in their prime, you are tyrannical; and also, as I
suspect, you have found out that I have weakness for the fair, and
therefore to humour you I must answer.
  Men. Please do.
  Soc. Would you like me to answer you after the manner of Gorgias,
which is familiar to you?
  Men. I should like nothing better.
  Soc. Do not he and you and Empedocles say that there are certain
effluences of existence?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And passages into which and through which the effluences pass?
  Men. Exactly.
  Soc. And some of the effluences fit into the passages, and some of
them are too small or too large?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And there is such a thing as sight?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And now, as Pindar says, "read my meaning" colour is an
effluence of form, commensurate with sight, and palpable to sense.
  Men. That, Socrates, appears to me to be an admirable answer.
  Soc. Why, yes, because it happens to be one which you have been in
the habit of hearing: and your wit will have discovered, I suspect,
that you may explain in the same way the nature of sound and smell,
and of many other similar phenomena.
  Men. Quite true.
  Soc. The answer, Meno, was in the orthodox solemn vein, and
therefore was more acceptable to you than the other answer about
figure.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And yet, O son of Alexidemus, I cannot help thinking that the
other was the better; and I am sure that you would be of the same
opinion, if you would only stay and be initiated, and were not
compelled, as you said yesterday, to go away before the mysteries.
  Men. But I will stay, Socrates, if you will give me many such
answers.
  Soc. Well then, for my own sake as well as for yours, I will do my
very best; but I am afraid that I shall not be able to give you very
many as good: and now, in your turn, you are to fulfil your promise,
and tell me what virtue is in the universal; and do not make a
singular into a plural, as the facetious say of those who break a
thing, but deliver virtue to me whole and sound, and not broken into a
number of pieces: I have given you the pattern.
  Men. Well then, Socrates, virtue, as I take it, is when he, who
desires the honourable, is able to provide it for himself; so the poet
says, and I say too-

   Virtue is the desire of things honourable and the power of
attaining them.

  Soc. And does he who desires the honourable also desire the good?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Then are there some who desire the evil and others who desire
the good? Do not all men, my dear sir, desire good?
  Men. I think not.
  Soc. There are some who desire evil?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Do you mean that they think the evils which they desire, to
be good; or do they know that they are evil and yet desire them?
  Men. Both, I think.
  Soc. And do you really imagine, Meno, that a man knows evils to be
evils and desires them notwithstanding?
  Men. Certainly I do.
  Soc. And desire is of possession?
  Men. Yes, of possession.
  Soc. And does he think that the evils will do good to him who
possesses them, or does he know that they will do him harm?
  Men. There are some who think that the evils will do them good,
and others who know that they will do them harm.
  Soc. And, in your opinion, do those who think that they will do them
good know that they are evils?
  Men. Certainly not.
  Soc. Is it not obvious that those who are ignorant of their nature
do not desire them; but they desire what they suppose to be goods
although they are really evils; and if they are mistaken and suppose
the evils to be good they really desire goods?
  Men. Yes, in that case.
  Soc. Well, and do those who, as you say, desire evils, and think
that evils are hurtful to the possessor of them, know that they will
be hurt by them?
  Men. They must know it.
  Soc. And must they not suppose that those who are hurt are miserable
in proportion to the hurt which is inflicted upon them?
  Men. How can it be otherwise?
  Soc. But are not the miserable ill-fated?
  Men. Yes, indeed.
  Soc. And does any one desire to be miserable and ill-fated?
  Men. I should say not, Socrates.
  Soc. But if there is no one who desires to be miserable, there is no
one, Meno, who desires evil; for what is misery but the desire and
possession of evil?
  Men. That appears to be the truth, Socrates, and I admit that nobody
desires evil.
  Soc. And yet, were you not saying just now that virtue is the desire
and power of attaining good?
  Men. Yes, I did say so.
  Soc. But if this be affirmed, then the desire of good is common to
all, and one man is no better than another in that respect?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And if one man is not better than another in desiring good,
he must be better in the power of attaining it?
  Men. Exactly.
  Soc. Then, according to your definition, virtue would appear to be
the power of attaining good?
  Men. I entirely approve, Socrates, of the manner in which you now
view this matter.
  Soc. Then let us see whether what you say is true from another point
of view; for very likely you may be right:-You affirm virtue to be the
power of attaining goods?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And the goods which mean are such as health and wealth and
the possession of gold and silver, and having office and honour in the
state-those are what you would call goods?
  Men. Yes, I should include all those.
  Soc. Then, according to Meno, who is the hereditary friend of the
great king, virtue is the power of getting silver and gold; and
would you add that they must be gained piously, justly, or do you deem
this to be of no consequence? And is any mode of acquisition, even
if unjust and dishonest, equally to be deemed virtue?
  Men. Not virtue, Socrates, but vice.
  Soc. Then justice or temperance or holiness, or some other part of
virtue, as would appear, must accompany the acquisition, and without
them the mere acquisition of good will not be virtue.
  Men. Why, how can there be virtue without these?
  Soc. And the non-acquisition of gold and silver in a dishonest
manner for oneself or another, or in other words the want of them, may
be equally virtue?
  Men. True.
  Soc. Then the acquisition of such goods is no more virtue than the
non-acquisition and want of them, but whatever is accompanied by
justice or honesty is virtue, and whatever is devoid of justice is
vice.
  Men. It cannot be otherwise, in my judgment.
  Soc. And were we not saying just now that justice, temperance, and
the like, were each of them a part of virtue?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And so, Meno, this is the way in which you mock me.
  Men. Why do you say that, Socrates?
  Soc. Why, because I asked you to deliver virtue into my hands
whole and unbroken, and I gave you a pattern according to which you
were to frame your answer; and you have forgotten already, and tell me
that virtue is the power of attaining good justly, or with justice;
and justice you acknowledge to be a part of virtue.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Then it follows from your own admissions, that virtue is
doing what you do with a part of virtue; for justice and the like
are said by you to be parts of virtue.
  Men. What of that?
  Soc. What of that! Why, did not I ask you to tell me the nature of
virtue as a whole? And you are very far from telling me this; but
declare every action to be virtue which is done with a part of virtue;
as though you had told me and I must already know the whole of virtue,
and this too when frittered away into little pieces. And, therefore,
my dear I fear that I must begin again and repeat the same question:
What is virtue? for otherwise, I can only say, that every action
done with a part of virtue is virtue; what else is the meaning of
saying that every action done with justice is virtue? Ought I not to
ask the question over again; for can any one who does not know
virtue know a part of virtue?
   Men. No; I do not say that he can.
   Soc. Do you remember how, in the example of figure, we rejected any
answer given in terms which were as yet unexplained or unadmitted?
   Men. Yes, Socrates; and we were quite right in doing so.
   Soc. But then, my friend, do not suppose that we can explain to any
one the nature of virtue as a whole through some unexplained portion
of virtue, or anything at all in that fashion; we should only have
to ask over again the old question, What is virtue? Am I not right?
   Men. I believe that you are.
   Soc. Then begin again, and answer me, What, according to you and
your friend Gorgias, is the definition of virtue?
   Men. O Socrates, I used to be told, before I knew you, that you
were always doubting yourself and making others doubt; and now you are
casting your spells over me, and I am simply getting bewitched and
enchanted, and am at my wits' end. And if I may venture to make a jest
upon you, you seem to me both in your appearance and in your power
over others to be very like the flat torpedo fish, who torpifies those
who come near him and touch him, as you have now torpified me, I
think. For my soul and my tongue are really torpid, and I do not
know how to answer you; and though I have been delivered of an
infinite variety of speeches about virtue before now, and to many
persons-and very good ones they were, as I thought-at this moment I
cannot even say what virtue is. And I think that. you are very wise in
not voyaging and going away from home, for if you did in other
places as do in Athens, you would be cast into prison as a magician.
  Soc. You are a rogue, Meno, and had all but caught me.
  Men. What do you mean, Socrates?
  Soc. I can tell why you made a simile about me.
  Men. Why?
  Soc. In order that I might make another simile about you. For I know
that all pretty young gentlemen like to have pretty similes made about
them-as well they may-but I shall not return the compliment. As to
my being a torpedo, if the torpedo is torpid as well as the cause of
torpidity in others, then indeed I am a torpedo, but not otherwise;
for I perplex others, not because I am clear, but because I am utterly
perplexed myself. And now I know not what virtue is, and you seem to
be in the same case, although you did once perhaps know before you
touched me. However, I have no objection to join with you in the
enquiry.
  Men. And how will you enquire, Socrates, into that which you do
not know? What will you put forth as the subject of enquiry? And if
you find what you want, how will you ever know that this is the
thing which you did not know?
  Soc. I know, Meno, what you mean; but just see what a tiresome
dispute you are introducing. You argue that man cannot enquire
either about that which he knows, or about that which he does not
know; for if he knows, he has no need to enquire; and if not, he
cannot; for he does not know the, very subject about which he is to
enquire.
  Men. Well, Socrates, and is not the argument sound?
  Soc. I think not.
  Men. Why not?
  Soc. I will tell you why: I have heard from certain wise men and
women who spoke of things divine that-
  Men. What did they say?
  Soc. They spoke of a glorious truth, as I conceive.
  Men. What was it? and who were they?
  Soc. Some of them were priests and priestesses, who had studied
how they might be able to give a reason of their profession: there,
have been poets also, who spoke of these things by inspiration, like
Pindar, and many others who were inspired. And they say-mark, now, and
see whether their words are true-they say that the soul of man is
immortal, and at one time has an end, which is termed dying, and at
another time is born again, but is never destroyed. And the moral
is, that a man ought to live always in perfect holiness. "For in the
ninth year Persephone sends the souls of those from whom she has
received the penalty of ancient crime back again from beneath into the
light of the sun above, and these are they who become noble kings
and mighty men and great in wisdom and are called saintly heroes in
after ages." The soul, then, as being immortal, and having been born
again many times, rand having seen all things that exist, whether in
this world or in the world below, has knowledge of them all; and it is
no wonder that she should be able to call to remembrance all that
she ever knew about virtue, and about everything; for as all nature is
akin, and the soul has learned all things; there is no difficulty in
her eliciting or as men say learning, out of a single recollection
-all the rest, if a man is strenuous and does not faint; for all
enquiry and all learning is but recollection. And therefore we ought
not to listen to this sophistical argument about the impossibility
of enquiry: for it will make us idle; and is sweet only to the
sluggard; but the other saying will make us active and inquisitive. In
that confiding, I will gladly enquire with you into the nature of
virtue.
  Men. Yes, Socrates; but what do you mean by saying that we do not
learn, and that what we call learning is only a process of
recollection? Can you teach me how this is?
  Soc. I told you, Meno, just now that you were a rogue, and now you
ask whether I can teach you, when I am saying that there is no
teaching, but only recollection; and thus you imagine that you will
involve me in a contradiction.
  Men. Indeed, Socrates, I protest that I had no such intention. I
only asked the question from habit; but if you can prove to me that
what you say is true, I wish that you would.
  Soc. It will be no easy matter, but I will try to please you to
the utmost of my power. Suppose that you call one of your numerous
attendants, that I may demonstrate on him.
  Men. Certainly. Come hither, boy.
  Soc. He is Greek, and speaks Greek, does he not?
  Men. Yes, indeed; he was born in the house.
  Soc. Attend now to the questions which I ask him, and observe
whether he learns of me or only remembers.
  Men. I will.
  Soc. Tell me, boy, do you know that a figure like this is a square?
  Boy. I do.
  Soc. And you know that a square figure has these four lines equal?
  Boy. Certainly.
  Soc. And these lines which I have drawn through the middle of the
square are also equal?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. A square may be of any size?
  Boy. Certainly.
  Soc. And if one side of the figure be of two feet, and the other
side be of two feet, how much will the whole be? Let me explain: if in
one direction the space was of two feet, and in other direction of one
foot, the whole would be of two feet taken once?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. But since this side is also of two feet, there are twice two
feet?
  Boy. There are.
  Soc. Then the square is of twice two feet?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And how many are twice two feet? count and tell me.
  Boy. Four, Socrates.
  Soc. And might there not be another square twice as large as this,
and having like this the lines equal?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And of how many feet will that be?
  Boy. Of eight feet.
  Soc. And now try and tell me the length of the line which forms
the side of that double square: this is two feet-what will that be?
  Boy. Clearly, Socrates, it will be double.
  Soc. Do you observe, Meno, that I am not teaching the boy
anything, but only asking him questions; and now he fancies that he
knows how long a line is necessary in order to produce a figure of
eight square feet; does he not?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And does he really know?
  Men. Certainly not.
  Soc. He only guesses that because the square is double, the line
is double.
  Men. True.
  Soc. Observe him while he recalls the steps in regular order. (To
the Boy.) Tell me, boy, do you assert that a double space comes from a
double line? Remember that I am not speaking of an oblong, but of a
figure equal every way, and twice the size of this-that is to say of
eight feet; and I want to know whether you still say that a double
square comes from double line?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. But does not this line become doubled if we add another such
line here?
  Boy. Certainly.
  Soc. And four such lines will make a space containing eight feet?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. Let us describe such a figure: Would you not say that this is
the figure of eight feet?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And are there not these four divisions in the figure, each of
which is equal to the figure of four feet?
  Boy. True.
  Soc. And is not that four times four?
  Boy. Certainly.
  Soc. And four times is not double?
  Boy. No, indeed.
  Soc. But how much?
  Boy. Four times as much.
  Soc. Therefore the double line, boy, has given a space, not twice,
but four times as much.
  Boy. True.
  Soc. Four times four are sixteen-are they not?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. What line would give you a space of right feet, as this gives
one of sixteen feet;-do you see?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And the space of four feet is made from this half line?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. Good; and is not a space of eight feet twice the size of
this, and half the size of the other?
  Boy. Certainly.
  Soc. Such a space, then, will be made out of a line greater than
this one, and less than that one?
  Boy. Yes; I think so.
  Soc. Very good; I like to hear you say what you think. And now
tell me, is not this a line of two feet and that of four?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. Then the line which forms the side of eight feet ought to be
more than this line of two feet, and less than the other of four feet?
  Boy. It ought.
  Soc. Try and see if you can tell me how much it will be.
  Boy. Three feet.
  Soc. Then if we add a half to this line of two, that will be the
line of three. Here are two and there is one; and on the other side,
here are two also and there is one: and that makes the figure of which
you speak?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. But if there are three feet this way and three feet that way,
the whole space will be three times three feet?
  Boy. That is evident.
  Soc. And how much are three times three feet?
  Boy. Nine.
  Soc. And how much is the double of four?
  Boy. Eight.
  Soc. Then the figure of eight is not made out of a of three?
  Boy. No.
  Soc. But from what line?-tell me exactly; and if you would rather
not reckon, try and show me the line.
  Boy. Indeed, Socrates, I do not know.
  Soc. Do you see, Meno, what advances he has made in his power of
recollection? He did not know at first, and he does not know now, what
is the side of a figure of eight feet: but then he thought that he
knew, and answered confidently as if he knew, and had no difficulty;
now he has a difficulty, and neither knows nor fancies that he knows.
  Men. True.
  Soc. Is he not better off in knowing his ignorance?
  Men. I think that he is.
  Soc. If we have made him doubt, and given him the "torpedo's shock,"
have we done him any harm?
  Men. I think not.
  Soc. We have certainly, as would seem, assisted him in some degree
to the discovery of the truth; and now he will wish to remedy his
ignorance, but then he would have been ready to tell all the world
again and again that the double space should have a double side.
  Men. True.
  Soc. But do you suppose that he would ever have enquired into or
learned what he fancied that he knew, though he was really ignorant of
it, until he had fallen into perplexity under the idea that he did not
know, and had desired to know?
  Men. I think not, Socrates.
  Soc. Then he was the better for the torpedo's touch?
  Men. I think so.
  Soc. Mark now the farther development. I shall only ask him, and not
teach him, and he shall share the enquiry with me: and do you watch
and see if you find me telling or explaining anything to him,
instead of eliciting his opinion. Tell me, boy, is not this a square
of four feet which I have drawn?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And now I add another square equal to the former one?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And a third, which is equal to either of them?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. Suppose that we fill up the vacant corner?
  Boy. Very good.
  Soc. Here, then, there are four equal spaces?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And how many times larger is this space than this other?
  Boy. Four times.
  Soc. But it ought to have been twice only, as you will remember.
  Boy. True.
  Soc. And does not this line, reaching from corner to corner,
bisect each of these spaces?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And are there not here four equal lines which contain this
space?
  Boy. There are.
  Soc. Look and see how much this space is.
  Boy. I do not understand.
  Soc. Has not each interior line cut off half of the four spaces?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And how many spaces are there in this section?
  Boy. Four.
  Soc. And how many in this?
  Boy. Two.
  Soc. And four is how many times two?
  Boy. Twice.
  Soc. And this space is of how many feet?
  Boy. Of eight feet.
  Soc. And from what line do you get this figure?
  Boy. From this.
  Soc. That is, from the line which extends from corner to corner of
the figure of four feet?
  Boy. Yes.
  Soc. And that is the line which the learned call the diagonal. And
if this is the proper name, then you, Meno's slave, are prepared to
affirm that the double space is the square of the diagonal?
  Boy. Certainly, Socrates.
  Soc. What do you say of him, Meno? Were not all these answers
given out of his own head?
  Men. Yes, they were all his own.
  Soc. And yet, as we were just now saying, he did not know?
  Men. True.
  Soc. But still he had in him those notions of his-had he not?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Then he who does not know may still have true notions of that
which he does not know?
  Men. He has.
  Soc. And at present these notions have just been stirred up in
him, as in a dream; but if he were frequently asked the same
questions, in different forms, he would know as well as any one at
last?
  Men. I dare say.
  Soc. Without any one teaching him he will recover his knowledge
for himself, if he is only asked questions?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And this spontaneous recovery of knowledge in him is
recollection?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And this knowledge which he now has must he not either have
acquired or always possessed?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. But if he always possessed this knowledge he would always
have known; or if he has acquired the knowledge he could not have
acquired it in this life, unless he has been taught geometry; for he
may be made to do the same with all geometry and every other branch of
knowledge. Now, has any one ever taught him all this? You must know
about him, if, as you say, he was born and bred in your house.
  Men. And I am certain that no one ever did teach him.
  Soc. And yet he has the knowledge?
  Men. The fact, Socrates, is undeniable.
  Soc. But if he did not acquire the knowledge in this life, then he
must have had and learned it at some other time?
  Men. Clearly he must.
  Soc. Which must have been the time when he was not a man?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And if there have been always true thoughts in him, both at the
time when he was and was not a man, which only need to be awakened
into knowledge by putting questions to him, his soul must have
always possessed this knowledge, for he always either was or was not a
man?
  Men. Obviously.
  Soc. And if the truth of all things always existed in the soul, then
the soul is immortal. Wherefore be of good cheer, and try to recollect
what you do not know, or rather what you do not remember.
  Men. I feel, somehow, that I like what you are saying.
  Soc. And I, Meno, like what I am saying. Some things I have said
of which I am not altogether confident. But that we shall be better
and braver and less helpless if we think that we ought to enquire,
than we should have been if we indulged in the idle fancy that there
was no knowing and no use in seeking to know what we do not know;-that
is a theme upon which I am ready to fight, in word and deed, to the
utmost of my power.
  Men. There again, Socrates, your words seem to me excellent.
  Soc. Then, as we are agreed that a man should enquire about that
which he does not know, shall you and I make an effort to enquire
together into the nature of virtue?
  Men. By all means, Socrates. And yet I would much rather return to
my original question, Whether in seeking to acquire virtue we should
regard it as a thing to be taught, or as a gift of nature, or as
coming to men in some other way?
  Soc. Had I the command of you as well as of myself, Meno, I would
not have enquired whether virtue is given by instruction or not, until
we had first ascertained "what it is." But as you think only of
controlling me who am your slave, and never of controlling
yourself,-such being your notion of freedom, I must yield to you,
for you are irresistible. And therefore I have now to enquire into the
qualities of a thing of which I do not as yet know the nature. At
any rate, will you condescend a little, and allow the question
"Whether virtue is given by instruction, or in any other way," to be
argued upon hypothesis? As the geometrician, when he is asked
whether a certain triangle is capable being inscribed in a certain
circle, will reply: "I cannot tell you as yet; but I will offer a
hypothesis which may assist us in forming a conclusion: If the
figure be such that when you have produced a given side of it, the
given area of the triangle falls short by an area corresponding to the
part produced, then one consequence follows, and if this is impossible
then some other; and therefore I wish to assume a hypothesis before
I tell you whether this triangle is capable of being inscribed in
the circle":-that is a geometrical hypothesis. And we too, as we
know not the nature and -qualities of virtue, must ask, whether virtue
is or not taught, under a hypothesis: as thus, if virtue is of such
a class of mental goods, will it be taught or not? Let the first
hypothesis be-that virtue is or is not knowledge,-in that case will it
be taught or not? or, as we were just now saying, remembered"? For
there is no use in disputing about the name. But is virtue taught or
not? or rather, does not everyone see that knowledge alone is taught?
  Men. I agree.
  Soc. Then if virtue is knowledge, virtue will be taught?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Then now we have made a quick end of this question: if virtue
is of such a nature, it will be taught; and if not, not?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. The next question is, whether virtue is knowledge or of another
species?
  Men. Yes, that appears to be the -question which comes next in
order.
  Soc. Do we not say that virtue is a good?-This is a hypothesis which
is not set aside.
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Now, if there be any sort-of good which is distinct from
knowledge, virtue may be that good; but if knowledge embraces all
good, then we shall be right in think in that virtue is knowledge?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And virtue makes us good?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And if we are good, then we are profitable; for all good things
are profitable?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Then virtue is profitable?
  Men. That is the only inference.
  Soc. Then now let us see what are the things which severally
profit us. Health and strength, and beauty and wealth-these, and the
like of these, we call profitable?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And yet these things may also sometimes do us harm: would you
not think so?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And what is the guiding principle which makes them profitable
or the reverse? Are they not profitable when they are rightly used,
and hurtful when they are not rightly used?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Next, let us consider the goods of the soul: they are
temperance, justice, courage, quickness of apprehension, memory,
magnanimity, and the like?
  Men. Surely.
  Soc. And such of these as are not knowledge, but of another sort,
are sometimes profitable and sometimes hurtful; as, for example,
courage wanting prudence, which is only a sort of confidence? When a
man has no sense he is harmed by courage, but when he has sense he
is profited?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And the same may be said of temperance and quickness of
apprehension; whatever things are learned or done with sense are
profitable, but when done without sense they are hurtful?
  Men. Very true.
  Soc. And in general, all that the attempts or endures, when under
the guidance of wisdom, ends in happiness; but when she is under the
guidance of folly, in the opposite?
  Men. That appears to be true.
  Soc. If then virtue is a quality of the soul, and is admitted to
be profitable, it must be wisdom or prudence, since none of the things
of the soul are either profitable or hurtful in themselves, but they
are all made profitable or hurtful by the addition of wisdom or of
folly; and therefore and therefore if virtue is profitable, virtue
must be a sort of wisdom or prudence?
  Men. I quite agree.
  Soc. And the other goods, such as wealth and the like, of which we
were just now saying that they are sometimes good and sometimes
evil, do not they also become profitable or hurtful, accordingly as
the soul guides and uses them rightly or wrongly; just as the things
of the soul herself are benefited when under the guidance of wisdom
and harmed by folly?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And the wise soul guides them rightly, and the foolish soul
wrongly.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And is not this universally true of human nature? All other
things hang upon the soul, and the things of the soul herself hang
upon wisdom, if they are to be good; and so wisdom is inferred to be
that which profits-and virtue, as we say, is profitable?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And thus we arrive at the conclusion that virtue is either
wholly or partly wisdom?
  Men. I think that what you are saying, Socrates, is very true.
  Soc. But if this is true, then the good are not by nature good?
  Men. I think not.
  Soc. If they had been, there would assuredly have been discerners of
characters among us who would have known our future great men; and
on their showing we should have adopted them, and when we had got
them, we should have kept them in the citadel out of the way of
harm, and set a stamp upon them far rather than upon a piece of
gold, in order that no one might tamper with them; and when they
grew up they would have been useful to the state?
  Men. Yes, Socrates, that would have been the right way.
  Soc. But if the good are not by nature good, are they made good by
instruction?
  Men. There appears to be no other alternative, Socrates. On the
supposition that virtue is knowledge, there can be no doubt that
virtue is taught.
  Soc. Yes, indeed; but what if the supposition is erroneous?
  Men. I certainly thought just now that we were right.
  Soc. Yes, Meno; but a principle which has any soundness should stand
firm not only just now, but always.
  Men. Well; and why are you so slow of heart to believe that
knowledge is virtue?
  Soc. I will try and tell you why, Meno. I do not retract the
assertion that if virtue is knowledge it may be taught; but I fear
that I have some reason in doubting whether virtue is knowledge: for
consider now. and say whether virtue, and not only virtue but anything
that is taught, must not have teachers and disciples?
  Men. Surely.
  Soc. And conversely, may not the art of which neither teachers nor
disciples exist be assumed to be incapable of being taught?
  Men. True; but do you think that there are no teachers of virtue?
  Soc. I have certainly often enquired whether there were any, and
taken great pains to find them, and have never succeeded; and many
have assisted me in the search, and they were the persons whom I
thought the most likely to know. Here at the moment when he is
wanted we fortunately have sitting by us Anytus, the very person of
whom we should make enquiry; to him then let us repair. In the first
Place, he is the son of a wealthy and wise father, Anthemion, who
acquired his wealth, not by accident or gift, like Ismenias the Theban
(who has recently made himself as rich as Polycrates), but by his
own skill and industry, and who is a well-conditioned, modest man, not
insolent, or over-bearing, or annoying; moreover, this son of his
has received a good education, as the Athenian people certainly appear
to think, for they choose him to fill the highest offices. And these
are the sort of men from whom you are likely to learn whether there
are any teachers of virtue, and who they are. Please, Anytus, to
help me and your friend Meno in answering our question, Who are the
teachers? Consider the matter thus: If we wanted Meno to be a good
physician, to whom should we send him? Should we not send him to the
physicians?
  Any. Certainly.
  Soc. Or if we wanted him to be a good cobbler, should we not send
him to the cobblers?
  Any. Yes.
  Soc. And so forth?
  Any. Yes.
  Soc. Let me trouble you with one more question. When we say that
we should be right in sending him to the physicians if we wanted him
to be a physician, do we mean that we should be right in sending him
to those who profess the art, rather than to those who do not, and
to those who demand payment for teaching the art, and profess to teach
it to any one who will come and learn? And if these were our
reasons, should we not be right in sending him?
  Any. Yes.
  Soc. And might not the same be said of flute-playing, and of the
other arts? Would a man who wanted to make another a flute-player
refuse to send him to those who profess to teach the art for money,
and be plaguing other persons to give him instruction, who are not
professed teachers and who never had a single disciple in that
branch of knowledge which he wishes him to acquire-would not such
conduct be the height of folly?
  Any. Yes, by Zeus, and of ignorance too.
  Soc. Very good. And now you are in a position to advise with me
about my friend Meno. He has been telling me, Anytus, that he
desires to attain that kind of wisdom and-virtue by which men order
the state or the house, and honour their parents, and know when to
receive and when to send away citizens and strangers, as a good man
should. Now, to whom should he go in order that he may learn this
virtue? Does not the previous argument imply clearly that we should
send him to those who profess and avouch that they are the common
teachers of all Hellas, and are ready to impart instruction to any one
who likes, at a fixed price?
  Any. Whom do you mean, Socrates?
  Soc. You surely know, do you not, Anytus, that these are the
people whom mankind call Sophists?
  Any. By Heracles, Socrates, forbear! I only hope that no friend or
kinsman or acquaintance of mine, whether citizen or stranger, will
ever be so mad as to allow himself to be corrupted by them; for they
are a manifest pest and corrupting influences to those who have to
do with them.
  Soc. What, Anytus? Of all the people who profess that they know
how to do men good, do you mean to say that these are the only ones
who not only do them no good, but positively corrupt those who are
entrusted to them, and in return for this disservice have the face
to demand money? Indeed, I cannot believe you; for I know of a
single man, Protagoras, who made more out of his craft than the
illustrious Pheidias, who created such noble works, or any ten other
statuaries. How could that A mender of old shoes, or patcher up of
clothes, who made the shoes or clothes worse than he received them,
could not have remained thirty days undetected, and would very soon
have starved; whereas during more than forty years, Protagoras was
corrupting all Hellas, and sending his disciples from him worse than
he received them, and he was never found out. For, if I am not
mistaken,-he was about seventy years old at his death, forty of
which were spent in the practice of his profession; and during all
that time he had a good reputation, which to this day he retains:
and not only Protagoras, but many others are well spoken of; some
who lived before him, and others who are still living. Now, when you
say that they deceived and corrupted the youth, are they to be
supposed to have corrupted them consciously or unconsciously? Can
those who were deemed by many to be the wisest men of Hellas have been
out of their minds?
  Any. Out of their minds! No, Socrates; the young men who gave
their money to them, were out of their minds, and their relations
and guardians who entrusted their youth to the care of these men
were still more out of their minds, and most of all, the cities who
allowed them to come in, and did not drive them out, citizen and
stranger alike.
  Soc. Has any of the Sophists wronged you, Anytus? What makes you
so angry with them?
  Any. No, indeed, neither I nor any of my belongings has ever had,
nor would I suffer them to have, anything to do with them.
  Soc. Then you are entirely unacquainted with them?
  Any. And I have no wish to be acquainted.
  Soc. Then, my dear friend, how can you know whether a thing is
good or bad of which you are wholly ignorant?
  Any. Quite well; I am sure that I know what manner of men these are,
whether I am acquainted with them or not.
  Soc. You must be a diviner, Anytus, for I really cannot make out,
judging from your own words, how, if you are not acquainted with them,
you know about them. But I am not enquiring of you who are the
teachers who will corrupt Meno (let them be, if you please, the
Sophists); I only ask you to tell him who there is in this great
city who will teach him how to become eminent in the virtues which I
was just, now describing. He is the friend of your family, and you
will oblige him.
  Any. Why do you not tell him yourself?
  Soc. I have told him whom I supposed to be the teachers of these
things; but I learn from you that I am utterly at fault, and I dare
say that you are right. And now I wish that you, on your part, would
tell me to whom among the Athenians he should go. Whom would you name?
 Any. Why single out individuals? Any Athenian gentleman, taken at
random, if he will mind him, will do far more, good to him than the
Sophists.
  Soc. And did those gentlemen grow of themselves; and without
having been taught by any one, were they nevertheless able to teach
others that which they had never learned themselves?
  Any. I imagine that they learned of the previous generation of
gentlemen. Have there not been many good men in this city?
  Soc. Yes, certainly, Anytus; and many good statesmen also there
always have been and there are still, in the city of Athens. But the
question is whether they were also good teachers of their own
virtue;-not whether there are, or have been, good men in this part
of the world, but whether virtue can be taught, is the question
which we have been discussing. Now, do we mean to say that the good
men our own and of other times knew how to impart to others that
virtue which they had themselves; or is virtue a thing incapable of
being communicated or imparted by one man to another? That is the
question which I and Meno have been arguing. Look at the matter in
your own way: Would you not admit that Themistocles was a good man?
  Any. Certainly; no man better.
  Soc. And must not he then have been a good teacher, if any man
ever was a good teacher, of his own virtue?
  Any. Yes certainly,-if he wanted to be so.
  Soc. But would he not have wanted? He would, at any rate, have
desired to make his own son a good man and a gentleman; he could not
have been jealous of him, or have intentionally abstained from
imparting to him his own virtue. Did you never hear that he made his
son Cleophantus a famous horseman; and had him taught to stand upright
on horseback and hurl a javelin, and to do many other marvellous
things; and in anything which could be learned from a master he was
well trained? Have you not heard from our elders of him?
  Any. I have.
  Soc. Then no one could say that his son showed any want of capacity?
  Any. Very likely not.
  Soc. But did any one, old or young, ever say in your hearing that
Cleophantus, son of Themistocles, was a wise or good man, as his
father was?
  Any. I have certainly never heard any one say so.
  Soc. And if virtue could have been taught, would his father
Themistocles have sought to train him in these minor
accomplishments, and allowed him who, as you must remember, was his
own son, to be no better than his neighbours in those qualities in
which he himself excelled?
  Any. Indeed, indeed, I think not.
  Soc. Here was a teacher of virtue whom you admit to be among the
best men of the past. Let us take another,-Aristides, the son of
Lysimachus: would you not acknowledge that he was a good man?
  Any. To be sure I should.
  Soc. And did not he train his son Lysimachus better than any other
Athenian in all that could be done for him by the help of masters? But
what has been the result? Is he a bit better than any other mortal? He
is an acquaintance of yours, and you see what he is like. There is
Pericles, again, magnificent in his wisdom; and he, as you are
aware, had two sons, Paralus and Xanthippus.
  Any. I know.
  Soc. And you know, also, that he taught them to be unrivalled
horsemen, and had them trained in music and gymnastics and all sorts
of arts-in these respects they were on a level with the best-and had
he no wish to make good men of them? Nay, he must have wished it.
But virtue, as I suspect, could not be taught. And that you may not
suppose the incompetent teachers to be only the meaner sort of
Athenians and few in number, remember again that Thucydides had two
sons, Melesias and Stephanus, whom, besides giving them a good
education in other things, he trained in wrestling, and they were
the best wrestlers in Athens: one of them he committed to the care
of Xanthias, and the other of Eudorus, who had the reputation of being
the most celebrated wrestlers of that day. Do you remember them?
  Any. I have heard of them.
  Soc. Now, can there be a doubt that Thucydides, whose children
were taught things for which he had to spend money, would have
taught them to be good men, which would have cost him nothing, if
virtue could have been taught? Will you reply that he was a mean
man, and had not many friends among the Athenians and allies? Nay, but
he was of a great family, and a man of influence at Athens and in
all Hellas, and, if virtue could have been taught, he would have found
out some Athenian or foreigner who would have made good men of his
sons, if he could not himself spare the time from cares of state. Once
more, I suspect, friend Anytus, that virtue is not a thing which can
be taught?
  Any. Socrates, I think that you are too ready to speak evil of
men: and, if you will take my advice, I would recommend you to be
careful. Perhaps there is no city in which it is not easier to do
men harm than to do them good, and this is certainly the case at
Athens, as I believe that you know.
  Soc. O Meno, think that Anytus is in a rage. And he may well be in a
rage, for he thinks, in the first place, that I am defaming these
gentlemen; and in the second place, he is of opinion that he is one of
them himself. But some day he will know what is the meaning of
defamation, and if he ever does, he will forgive me. Meanwhile I
will return to you, Meno; for I suppose that there are gentlemen in
your region too?
  Men. Certainly there are.
  Soc. And are they willing to teach the young? and do they profess to
be teachers? and do they agree that virtue is taught?
  Men. No indeed, Socrates, they are anything but agreed; you may hear
them saying at one time that virtue can be taught, and then again
the reverse.
  Soc. Can we call those teachers who do not acknowledge the
possibility of their own vocation?
  Men. I think not, Socrates.
  Soc. And what do you think of these Sophists, who are the only
professors? Do they seem to you to be teachers of virtue?
  Men. I often wonder, Socrates, that Gorgias is never heard promising
to teach virtue: and when he hears others promising he only laughs
at them; but he thinks that men should be taught to speak.
  Soc. Then do you not think that the Sophists are teachers?
  Men. I cannot tell you, Socrates; like the rest of the world, I am
in doubt, and sometimes I think that they are teachers and sometimes
not.
  Soc. And are you aware that not you only and other politicians
have doubts whether virtue can be taught or not, but that Theognis the
poet says the very same thing?
  Men. Where does he say so?
  Soc. In these elegiac verses:

  Eat and drink and sit with the mighty, and make yourself agreeable
to them; for from the good you will learn what is good, but if you mix
with the bad you will lose the intelligence which you already have.

Do you observe that here he seems to imply that virtue can be taught?
  Men. Clearly.
  Soc. But in some other verses he shifts about and says:

  If understanding could be created and put into a man, then they [who
were able to perform this feat] would have obtained great rewards.

And again:-

  Never would a bad son have sprung from a good sire, for he would
have heard the voice of instruction; but not by teaching will you ever
make a bad man into a good one.

And this, as you may remark, is a contradiction of the other.
  Men. Clearly.
  Soc. And is there anything else of which the professors are affirmed
not only not to be teachers of others, but to be ignorant
themselves, and bad at the knowledge of that which they are professing
to teach? or is there anything about which even the acknowledged
"gentlemen" are sometimes saying that "this thing can be taught,"
and sometimes the opposite? Can you say that they are teachers in
any true sense whose ideas are in such confusion?
  Men. I should say, certainly not.
  Soc. But if neither the Sophists nor the gentlemen are teachers,
clearly there can be no other teachers?
  Men. No.
  Soc. And if there are no teachers, neither are there disciples?
  Men. Agreed.
  Soc. And we have admitted that a thing cannot be taught of which
there are neither teachers nor disciples?
  Men. We have.
  Soc. And there are no teachers of virtue to be found anywhere?
  Men. There are not.
  Soc. And if there are no teachers, neither are there scholars?
  Men. That, I think, is true.
  Soc. Then virtue cannot be taught?
  Men. Not if we are right in our view. But I cannot believe,
Socrates, that there are no good men: And if there are, how did they
come into existence?
  Soc. I am afraid, Meno, that you and I are not good for much, and
that Gorgias has been as poor an educator of you as Prodicus has
been of me. Certainly we shall have to look to ourselves, and try to
find some one who will help in some way or other to improve us. This I
say, because I observe that in the previous discussion none of us
remarked that right and good action is possible to man under other
guidance than that of knowledge (episteme);-and indeed if this be
denied, there is no seeing how there can be any good men at all.
  Men. How do you mean, Socrates?
  Soc. I mean that good men are necessarily useful or profitable. Were
we not right in admitting this? It must be so.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And in supposing that they will be useful only if they are true
guides to us of action-there we were also right?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. But when we said that a man cannot be a good guide unless he
have knowledge (phrhonesis), this we were wrong.
  Men. What do you mean by the word "right"?
  Soc. I will explain. If a man knew the way to Larisa, or anywhere
else, and went to the place and led others thither, would he not be
a right and good guide?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And a person who had a right opinion about the way, but had
never been and did not know, might be a good guide also, might he not?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And while he has true opinion about that which the other knows,
he will be just as good a guide if he thinks the truth, as he who
knows the truth?
  Men. Exactly.
  Soc. Then true opinion is as good a guide to correct action as
knowledge; and that was the point which we omitted in our
speculation about the nature of virtue, when we said that knowledge
only is the guide of right action; whereas there is also right
opinion.
  Men. True.
  Soc. Then right opinion is not less useful than knowledge?
  Men. The difference, Socrates, is only that he who has knowledge
will always be right; but he who has right opinion will sometimes be
right, and sometimes not.
  Soc. What do you mean? Can he be wrong who has right opinion, so
long as he has right opinion?
  Men. I admit the cogency of your argument, and therefore,
Socrates, I wonder that knowledge should be preferred to right
opinion-or why they should ever differ.
  Soc. And shall I explain this wonder to you?
  Men. Do tell me.
  Soc. You would not wonder if you had ever observed the images of
Daedalus; but perhaps you have not got them in your country?
  Men. What have they to do with the question?
  Soc. Because they require to be fastened in order to keep them,
and if they are not fastened they will play truant and run away.
  Men. Well. what of that?
  Soc. I mean to say that they are not very valuable possessions if
they are at liberty, for they will walk off like runaway slaves; but
when fastened, they are of great value, for they are really
beautiful works of art. Now this is an illustration of the nature of
true opinions: while they abide with us they are beautiful and
fruitful, but they run away out of the human soul, and do not remain
long, and therefore they are not of much value until they are fastened
by the tie of the cause; and this fastening of them, friend Meno, is
recollection, as you and I have agreed to call it. But when they are
bound, in the first place, they have the nature of knowledge; and,
in the second place, they are abiding. And this is why knowledge is
more honourable and excellent than true opinion, because fastened by a
chain.
  Men. What you are saying, Socrates, seems to be very like the truth.
  Soc. I too speak rather in ignorance; I only conjecture. And yet
that knowledge differs from true opinion is no matter of conjecture
with me. There are not many things which I profess to know, but this
is most certainly one of them.
  Men. Yes, Socrates; and you are quite right in saying so.
  Soc. And am I not also right in saying that true opinion leading the
way perfects action quite as well as knowledge?
  Men. There again, Socrates, I think you are right.
  Soc. Then right opinion is not a whit inferior to knowledge, or less
useful in action; nor is the man who has right opinion inferior to him
who has knowledge?
  Men. True.
  Soc. And surely the good man has been acknowledged by us to be
useful?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Seeing then that men become good and useful to states, not only
because they have knowledge, but because they have right opinion,
and that neither knowledge nor right opinion is given to man by nature
or acquired by him-(do you imagine either of them to be given by
nature?
  Men. Not I.)
  Soc. Then if they are not given by nature, neither are the good by
nature good?
  Men. Certainly not.
  Soc. And nature being excluded, then came the question whether
virtue is acquired by teaching?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. If virtue was wisdom [or knowledge], then, as we thought, it
was taught?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And if it was taught it was wisdom?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And if there were teachers, it might be taught; and if there
were no teachers, not?
  Men. True.
  Soc. But surely we acknowledged that there were no teachers of
virtue?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. Then we acknowledged that it was not taught, and was not
wisdom?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And yet we admitted that it was a good?
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And the right guide is useful and good?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. And the only right guides are knowledge and true
opinion-these are the guides of man; for things which happen by chance
are not under the guidance of man: but the guides of man are true
opinion and knowledge.
  Men. I think so too.
  Soc. But if virtue is not taught, neither is virtue knowledge.
  Men. Clearly not.
  Soc. Then of two good and useful things, one, which is knowledge,
has been set aside, and cannot be supposed to be our guide in
political life.
  Men. I think not.
  Soc. And therefore not by any wisdom, and not because they were
wise, did Themistocles and those others of whom Anytus spoke govern
states. This was the reason why they were unable to make others like
themselves-because their virtue was not grounded on knowledge.
  Men. That is probably true, Socrates.
  Soc. But if not by knowledge, the only alternative which remains
is that statesmen must have guided states by right opinion, which is
in politics what divination is in religion; for diviners and also
prophets say many things truly, but they know not what they say.
  Men. So I believe.
  Soc. And may we not, Meno, truly call those men "divine" who, having
no understanding, yet succeed in many a grand deed and word?
  Men. Certainly.
  Soc. Then we shall also be right in calling divine those whom we
were just now speaking of as diviners and prophets, including the
whole tribe of poets. Yes, and statesmen above all may be said to be
divine and illumined, being inspired and possessed of God, in which
condition they say many grand things, not knowing what they say.
  Men. Yes.
  Soc. And the women too, Meno, call good men divine-do they not?
and the Spartans, when they praise a good man, say "that he is a
divine man."
  Men. And I think, Socrates, that they are right; although very
likely our friend Anytus may take offence at the word.
  Soc. I da not care; as for Anytus, there will be another opportunity
of talking with him. To sum up our enquiry-the result seems to be,
if we are at all right in our view, that virtue is neither natural nor
acquired, but an instinct given by God to the virtuous. Nor is the
instinct accompanied by reason, unless there may be supposed to be
among statesmen some one who is capable of educating statesmen. And if
there be such an one, he may be said to be among the living what Homer
says that Tiresias was among the dead, "he alone has understanding;
but the rest are flitting shades"; and he and his virtue in like
manner will be a reality among shadows.
  Men. That is excellent, Socrates.
  Soc. Then, Meno, the conclusion is that virtue comes to the virtuous
by the gift of God. But we shall never know the certain truth until,
before asking how virtue is given, we enquire into the actual nature
of virtue. I fear that I must go away, but do you, now that you are
persuaded yourself, persuade our friend Anytus. And do not let him
be so exasperated; if you can conciliate him, you will have done
good service to the Athenian people.


                            -THE END-
.

                                     360 BC
                                     PHAEDO
                                    by Plato
                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
     PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE

  PHAEDO, who is the narrator of the dialogue to ECHECRATES of Phlius
  SOCRATES
  APOLLODORUS
  SIMMIAS
  CEBES
  CRITO
  ATTENDANT OF THE PRISON
PHAEDO
     SCENE: The Prison of Socrates
     PLACE OF THE NARRATION: Phlius

  Echecrates. Were you yourself, Phaedo, in the prison with Socrates
on the day when he drank the poison?
  Phaedo. Yes, Echecrates, I was.
  Ech. I wish that you would tell me about his death. What did he
say in his last hours? We were informed that he died by taking poison,
but no one knew anything more; for no Phliasian ever goes to Athens
now, and a long time has elapsed since any Athenian found his way to
Phlius, and therefore we had no clear account.
  Phaed. Did you not hear of the proceedings at the trial?
  Ech. Yes; someone told us about the trial, and we could not
understand why, having been condemned, he was put to death, as
appeared, not at the time, but long afterwards. What was the reason of
this?
  Phaed. An accident, Echecrates. The reason was that the stern of the
ship which the Athenians send to Delos happened to have been crowned
on the day before he was tried.
  Ech. What is this ship?
  Phaed. This is the ship in which, as the Athenians say, Theseus went
to Crete when he took with him the fourteen youths, and was the
saviour of them and of himself. And they were said to have vowed to
Apollo at the time, that if they were saved they would make an
annual pilgrimage to Delos. Now this custom still continues, and the
whole period of the voyage to and from Delos, beginning when the
priest of Apollo crowns the stern of the ship, is a holy season,
during which the city is not allowed to be polluted by public
executions; and often, when the vessel is detained by adverse winds,
there may be a very considerable delay. As I was saying, the ship
was crowned on the day before the trial, and this was the reason why
Socrates lay in prison and was not put to death until long after he
was condemned.
  Ech. What was the manner of his death, Phaedo? What was said or
done? And which of his friends had he with him? Or were they not
allowed by the authorities to be present? And did he die alone?
  Phaed. No; there were several of his friends with him.
  Ech. If you have nothing to do, I wish that you would tell me what
passed, as exactly as you can.
  Phaed. I have nothing to do, and will try to gratify your wish.
For to me, too, there is no greater pleasure than to have Socrates
brought to my recollection, whether I speak myself or hear another
speak of him.
  Ech. You will have listeners who are of the same mind with you,
and I hope that you will be as exact as you can.
  Phaed. I remember the strange feeling which came over me at being
with him. For I could hardly believe that I was present at the death
of a friend, and therefore I did not pity him, Echecrates; his mien
and his language were so noble and fearless in the hour of death
that to me he appeared blessed. I thought that in going to the other
world he could not be without a divine call, and that he would be
happy, if any man ever was, when he arrived there, and therefore I did
not pity him as might seem natural at such a time. But neither could I
feel the pleasure which I usually felt in philosophical discourse (for
philosophy was the theme of which we spoke). I was pleased, and I
was also pained, because I knew that he was soon to die, and this
strange mixture of feeling was shared by us all; we were laughing
and weeping by turns, especially the excitable Apollodorus-you know
the sort of man?
  Ech. Yes.
  Phaed. He was quite overcome; and I myself and all of us were
greatly moved.
  Ech. Who were present?
  Phaed. Of native Athenians there were, besides Apollodorus,
Critobulus and his father Crito, Hermogenes, Epigenes, Aeschines,
and Antisthenes; likewise Ctesippus of the deme of Paeania, Menexenus,
and some others; but Plato, if I am not mistaken, was ill.
  Ech. Were there any strangers?
  Phaed. Yes, there were; Simmias the Theban, and Cebes, and
Phaedondes; Euclid and Terpison, who came from Megara.
  Ech. And was Aristippus there, and Cleombrotus?
  Phaed. No, they were said to be in Aegina.
  Ech. Anyone else?
  Phaed. I think that these were about all.
  Ech. And what was the discourse of which you spoke?
  Phaed. I will begin at the beginning, and endeavor to repeat the
entire conversation. You must understand that we had been previously
in the habit of assembling early in the morning at the court in
which the trial was held, and which is not far from the prison.
There we remained talking with one another until the opening of the
prison doors (for they were not opened very early), and then went in
and generally passed the day with Socrates. On the last morning the
meeting was earlier than usual; this was owing to our having heard
on the previous evening that the sacred ship had arrived from Delos,
and therefore we agreed to meet very early at the accustomed place. On
our going to the prison, the jailer who answered the door, instead
of admitting us, came out and bade us wait and he would call us.
"For the Eleven," he said, "are now with Socrates; they are taking off
his chains, and giving orders that he is to die to-day." He soon
returned and said that we might come in. On entering we found Socrates
just released from chains, and Xanthippe, whom you know, sitting by
him, and holding his child in her arms. When she saw us she uttered
a cry and said, as women will: "O Socrates, this is the last time that
either you will converse with your friends, or they with you."
Socrates turned to Crito and said: "Crito, let someone take her home."
Some of Crito's people accordingly led her away, crying out and
beating herself. And when she was gone, Socrates, sitting up on the
couch, began to bend and rub his leg, saying, as he rubbed: "How
singular is the thing called pleasure, and how curiously related to
pain, which might be thought to be the opposite of it; for they
never come to a man together, and yet he who pursues either of them is
generally compelled to take the other. They are two, and yet they grow
together out of one head or stem; and I cannot help thinking that if
Aesop had noticed them, he would have made a fable about God trying to
reconcile their strife, and when he could not, he fastened their heads
together; and this is the reason why when one comes the other follows,
as I find in my own case pleasure comes following after the pain in my
leg, which was caused by the chain."
  Upon this Cebes said: I am very glad indeed, Socrates, that you
mentioned the name of Aesop. For that reminds me of a question which
has been asked by others, and was asked of me only the day before
yesterday by Evenus the poet, and as he will be sure to ask again, you
may as well tell me what I should say to him, if you would like him to
have an answer. He wanted to know why you who never before wrote a
line of poetry, now that you are in prison are putting Aesop into
verse, and also composing that hymn in honor of Apollo.
  Tell him, Cebes, he replied, that I had no idea of rivalling him
or his poems; which is the truth, for I knew that I could not do that.
But I wanted to see whether I could purge away a scruple which I
felt about certain dreams. In the course of my life I have often had
intimations in dreams "that I should make music." The same dream
came to me sometimes in one form, and sometimes in another, but always
saying the same or nearly the same words: Make and cultivate music,
said the dream. And hitherto I had imagined that this was only
intended to exhort and encourage me in the study of philosophy,
which has always been the pursuit of my life, and is the noblest and
best of music. The dream was bidding me to do what I was already
doing, in the same way that the competitor in a race is bidden by
the spectators to run when he is already running. But I was not
certain of this, as the dream might have meant music in the popular
sense of the word, and being under sentence of death, and the festival
giving me a respite, I thought that I should be safer if I satisfied
the scruple, and, in obedience to the dream, composed a few verses
before I departed. And first I made a hymn in honor of the god of
the festival, and then considering that a poet, if he is really to
be a poet or maker, should not only put words together but make
stories, and as I have no invention, I took some fables of esop, which
I had ready at hand and knew, and turned them into verse. Tell
Evenus this, and bid him be of good cheer; that I would have him
come after me if he be a wise man, and not tarry; and that to-day I am
likely to be going, for the Athenians say that I must.
  Simmias said: What a message for such a man! having been a
frequent companion of his, I should say that, as far as I know him, he
will never take your advice unless he is obliged.
  Why, said Socrates,-is not Evenus a philosopher?
  I think that he is, said Simmias.
  Then he, or any man who has the spirit of philosophy, will be
willing to die, though he will not take his own life, for that is held
not to be right.
  Here he changed his position, and put his legs off the couch on to
the ground, and during the rest of the conversation he remained
sitting.
  Why do you say, inquired Cebes, that a man ought not to take his own
life, but that the philosopher will be ready to follow the dying?
  Socrates replied: And have you, Cebes and Simmias, who are
acquainted with Philolaus, never heard him speak of this?
  I never understood him, Socrates.
  My words, too, are only an echo; but I am very willing to say what I
have heard: and indeed, as I am going to another place, I ought to
be thinking and talking of the nature of the pilgrimage which I am
about to make. What can I do better in the interval between this and
the setting of the sun?
  Then tell me, Socrates, why is suicide held not to be right? as I
have certainly heard Philolaus affirm when he was staying with us at
Thebes: and there are others who say the same, although none of them
has ever made me understand him.
  But do your best, replied Socrates, and the day may come when you
will understand. I suppose that you wonder why, as most things which
are evil may be accidentally good, this is to be the only exception
(for may not death, too, be better than life in some cases?), and why,
when a man is better dead, he is not permitted to be his own
benefactor, but must wait for the hand of another.
  By Jupiter! yes, indeed, said Cebes, laughing, and speaking in his
native Doric.
  I admit the appearance of inconsistency, replied Socrates, but there
may not be any real inconsistency after all in this. There is a
doctrine uttered in secret that man is a prisoner who has no right
to open the door of his prison and run away; this is a great mystery
which I do not quite understand. Yet I, too, believe that the gods are
our guardians, and that we are a possession of theirs. Do you not
agree?
  Yes, I agree to that, said Cebes.
  And if one of your own possessions, an ox or an ass, for example
took the liberty of putting himself out of the way when you had
given no intimation of your wish that he should die, would you not
be angry with him, and would you not punish him if you could?
  Certainly, replied Cebes.
  Then there may be reason in saying that a man should wait, and not
take his own life until God summons him, as he is now summoning me.
  Yes, Socrates, said Cebes, there is surely reason in that. And yet
how can you reconcile this seemingly true belief that God is our
guardian and we his possessions, with that willingness to die which we
were attributing to the philosopher? That the wisest of men should
be willing to leave this service in which they are ruled by the gods
who are the best of rulers is not reasonable, for surely no wise man
thinks that when set at liberty he can take better care of himself
than the gods take of him. A fool may perhaps think this-he may
argue that he had better run away from his master, not considering
that his duty is to remain to the end, and not to run away from the
good, and that there is no sense in his running away. But the wise man
will want to be ever with him who is better than himself. Now this,
Socrates, is the reverse of what was just now said; for upon this view
the wise man should sorrow and the fool rejoice at passing out of
life.
  The earnestness of Cebes seemed to please Socrates. Here, said he,
turning to us, is a man who is always inquiring, and is not to be
convinced all in a moment, nor by every argument.
  And in this case, added Simmias, his objection does appear to me
to have some force. For what can be the meaning of a truly wise man
wanting to fly away and lightly leave a master who is better than
himself? And I rather imagine that Cebes is referring to you; he
thinks that you are too ready to leave us, and too ready to leave
the gods who, as you acknowledge, are our good rulers.
  Yes, replied Socrates; there is reason in that. And this
indictment you think that I ought to answer as if I were in court?
  That is what we should like, said Simmias.
  Then I must try to make a better impression upon you than I did when
defending myself before the judges. For I am quite ready to
acknowledge, Simmias and Cebes, that I ought to be grieved at death,
if I were not persuaded that I am going to other gods who are wise and
good (of this I am as certain as I can be of anything of the sort) and
to men departed (though I am not so certain of this), who are better
than those whom I leave behind; and therefore I do not grieve as I
might have done, for I have good hope that there is yet something
remaining for the dead, and, as has been said of old, some far
better thing for the good than for the evil.
  But do you mean to take away your thoughts with you, Socrates?
said Simmias. Will you not communicate them to us?-the benefit is
one in which we too may hope to share. Moreover, if you succeed in
convincing us, that will be an answer to the charge against yourself.
  I will do my best, replied Socrates. But you must first let me
hear what Crito wants; he was going to say something to me.
  Only this, Socrates, replied Crito: the attendant who is to give you
the poison has been telling me that you are not to talk much, and he
wants me to let you know this; for that by talking heat is
increased, and this interferes with the action of the poison; those
who excite themselves are sometimes obliged to drink the poison two or
three times.
  Then, said Socrates, let him mind his business and be prepared to
give the poison two or three times, if necessary; that is all.
  I was almost certain that you would say that, replied Crito; but I
was obliged to satisfy him.
  Never mind him, he said.
  And now I will make answer to you, O my judges, and show that he who
has lived as a true philosopher has reason to be of good cheer when he
is about to die, and that after death he may hope to receive the
greatest good in the other world. And how this may be, Simmias and
Cebes, I will endeavor to explain. For I deem that the true disciple
of philosophy is likely to be misunderstood by other men; they do
not perceive that he is ever pursuing death and dying; and if this
is true, why, having had the desire of death all his life long, should
he repine at the arrival of that which he has been always pursuing and
desiring?
  Simmias laughed and said: Though not in a laughing humor, I swear
that I cannot help laughing when I think what the wicked world will
say when they hear this. They will say that this is very true, and our
people at home will agree with them in saying that the life which
philosophers desire is truly death, and that they have found them
out to be deserving of the death which they desire.
  And they are right, Simmias, in saying this, with the exception of
the words "They have found them out"; for they have not found out what
is the nature of this death which the true philosopher desires, or how
he deserves or desires death. But let us leave them and have a word
with ourselves: Do we believe that there is such a thing as death?
  To be sure, replied Simmias.
  And is this anything but the separation of soul and body? And
being dead is the attainment of this separation; when the soul
exists in herself, and is parted from the body and the body is
parted from the soul-that is death?
  Exactly: that and nothing else, he replied.
  And what do you say of another question, my friend, about which I
should like to have your opinion, and the answer to which will
probably throw light on our present inquiry: Do you think that the
philosopher ought to care about the pleasures-if they are to be called
pleasures-of eating and drinking?
  Certainly not, answered Simmias.
  And what do you say of the pleasures of love-should he care about
them?
  By no means.
  And will he think much of the other ways of indulging the body-for
example, the acquisition of costly raiment, or sandals, or other
adornments of the body? Instead of caring about them, does he not
rather despise anything more than nature needs? What do you say?
  I should say the true philosopher would despise them.
  Would you not say that he is entirely concerned with the soul and
not with the body? He would like, as far as he can, to be quit of
the body and turn to the soul.
  That is true.
  In matters of this sort philosophers, above all other men, may be
observed in every sort of way to dissever the soul from the body.
  That is true.
  Whereas, Simmias, the rest of the world are of opinion that a life
which has no bodily pleasures and no part in them is not worth having;
but that he who thinks nothing of bodily pleasures is almost as though
he were dead.
  That is quite true.
  What again shall we say of the actual acquirement of knowledge?-is
the body, if invited to share in the inquiry, a hinderer or a
helper? I mean to say, have sight and hearing any truth in them? Are
they not, as the poets are always telling us, inaccurate witnesses?
and yet, if even they are inaccurate and indistinct, what is to be
said of the other senses?-for you will allow that they are the best of
them?
  Certainly, he replied.
  Then when does the soul attain truth?-for in attempting to
consider anything in company with the body she is obviously deceived.
  Yes, that is true.
  Then must not existence be revealed to her in thought, if at all?
  Yes.
  And thought is best when the mind is gathered into herself and
none of these things trouble her-neither sounds nor sights nor pain
nor any pleasure-when she has as little as possible to do with the
body, and has no bodily sense or feeling, but is aspiring after being?
  That is true.
  And in this the philosopher dishonors the body; his soul runs away
from the body and desires to be alone and by herself?
  That is true.
  Well, but there is another thing, Simmias: Is there or is there
not an absolute justice?
  Assuredly there is.
  And an absolute beauty and absolute good?
  Of course.
  But did you ever behold any of them with your eyes?
  Certainly not.
  Or did you ever reach them with any other bodily sense? (and I speak
not of these alone, but of absolute greatness, and health, and
strength, and of the essence or true nature of everything). Has the
reality of them ever been perceived by you through the bodily
organs? or rather, is not the nearest approach to the knowledge of
their several natures made by him who so orders his intellectual
vision as to have the most exact conception of the essence of that
which he considers?
  Certainly.
  And he attains to the knowledge of them in their highest purity
who goes to each of them with the mind alone, not allowing when in the
act of thought the intrusion or introduction of sight or any other
sense in the company of reason, but with the very light of the mind in
her clearness penetrates into the very fight of truth in each; he
has got rid, as far as he can, of eyes and ears and of the whole body,
which he conceives of only as a disturbing element, hindering the soul
from the acquisition of knowledge when in company with her-is not this
the sort of man who, if ever man did, is likely to attain the
knowledge of existence?
  There is admirable truth in that, Socrates, replied Simmias.
  And when they consider all this, must not true philosophers make a
reflection, of which they will speak to one another in such words as
these: We have found, they will say, a path of speculation which seems
to bring us and the argument to the conclusion that while we are in
the body, and while the soul is mingled with this mass of evil, our
desire will not be satisfied, and our desire is of the truth. For
the body is a source of endless trouble to us by reason of the mere
requirement of food; and also is liable to diseases which overtake and
impede us in the search after truth: and by filling us so full of
loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies, and idols, and every sort of
folly, prevents our ever having, as people say, so much as a
thought. For whence come wars, and fightings, and factions? whence but
from the body and the lusts of the body? For wars are occasioned by
the love of money, and money has to be acquired for the sake and in
the service of the body; and in consequence of all these things the
time which ought to be given to philosophy is lost. Moreover, if there
is time and an inclination toward philosophy, yet the body
introduces a turmoil and confusion and fear into the course of
speculation, and hinders us from seeing the truth: and all
experience shows that if we would have pure knowledge of anything we
must be quit of the body, and the soul in herself must behold all
things in themselves: then I suppose that we shall attain that which
we desire, and of which we say that we are lovers, and that is wisdom,
not while we live, but after death, as the argument shows; for if
while in company with the body the soul cannot have pure knowledge,
one of two things seems to follow-either knowledge is not to be
attained at all, or, if at all, after death. For then, and not till
then, the soul will be in herself alone and without the body. In
this present life, I reckon that we make the nearest approach to
knowledge when we have the least possible concern or interest in the
body, and are not saturated with the bodily nature, but remain pure
until the hour when God himself is pleased to release us. And then the
foolishness of the body will be cleared away and we shall be pure
and hold converse with other pure souls, and know of ourselves the
clear light everywhere; and this is surely the light of truth. For
no impure thing is allowed to approach the pure. These are the sort of
words, Simmias, which the true lovers of wisdom cannot help saying
to one another, and thinking. You will agree with me in that?
  Certainly, Socrates.
  But if this is true, O my friend, then there is great hope that,
going whither I go, I shall there be satisfied with that which has
been the chief concern of you and me in our past lives. And now that
the hour of departure is appointed to me, this is the hope with
which I depart, and not I only, but every man who believes that he has
his mind purified.
  Certainly, replied Simmias.
  And what is purification but the separation of the soul from the
body, as I was saying before; the habit of the soul gathering and
collecting herself into herself, out of all the courses of the body;
the dwelling in her own place alone, as in another life, so also in
this, as far as she can; the release of the soul from the chains of
the body?
  Very true, he said.
  And what is that which is termed death, but this very separation and
release of the soul from the body?
  To be sure, he said.
  And the true philosophers, and they only, study and are eager to
release the soul. Is not the separation and release of the soul from
the body their especial study?
  That is true.
  And as I was saying at first, there would be a ridiculous
contradiction in men studying to live as nearly as they can in a state
of death, and yet repining when death comes.
  Certainly.
  Then, Simmias, as the true philosophers are ever studying death,
to them, of all men, death is the least terrible. Look at the matter
in this way: how inconsistent of them to have been always enemies of
the body, and wanting to have the soul alone, and when this is granted
to them, to be trembling and repining; instead of rejoicing at their
departing to that place where, when they arrive, they hope to gain
that which in life they loved (and this was wisdom), and at the same
time to be rid of the company of their enemy. Many a man has been
willing to go to the world below in the hope of seeing there an
earthly love, or wife, or son, and conversing with them. And will he
who is a true lover of wisdom, and is persuaded in like manner that
only in the world below he can worthily enjoy her, still repine at
death? Will he not depart with joy? Surely he will, my friend, if he
be a true philosopher. For he will have a firm conviction that there
only, and nowhere else, he can find wisdom in her purity. And if
this be true, he would be very absurd, as I was saying, if he were
to fear death.
  He would, indeed, replied Simmias.
  And when you see a man who is repining at the approach of death,
is not his reluctance a sufficient proof that he is not a lover of
wisdom, but a lover of the body, and probably at the same time a lover
of either money or power, or both?
  That is very true, he replied.
  There is a virtue, Simmias, which is named courage. Is not that a
special attribute of the philosopher?
  Certainly.
  Again, there is temperance. Is not the calm, and control, and
disdain of the passions which even the many call temperance, a quality
belonging only to those who despise the body and live in philosophy?
  That is not to be denied.
  For the courage and temperance of other men, if you will consider
them, are really a contradiction.
  How is that, Socrates?
  Well, he said, you are aware that death is regarded by men in
general as a great evil.
  That is true, he said.
  And do not courageous men endure death because they are afraid of
yet greater evils?
  That is true.
  Then all but the philosophers are courageous only from fear, and
because they are afraid; and yet that a man should be courageous
from fear, and because he is a coward, is surely a strange thing.
  Very true.
  And are not the temperate exactly in the same case? They are
temperate because they are intemperate-which may seem to be a
contradiction, but is nevertheless the sort of thing which happens
with this foolish temperance. For there are pleasures which they
must have, and are afraid of losing; and therefore they abstain from
one class of pleasures because they are overcome by another: and
whereas intemperance is defined as "being under the dominion of
pleasure," they overcome only because they are overcome by pleasure.
And that is what I mean by saying that they are temperate through
intemperance.
  That appears to be true.
  Yet the exchange of one fear or pleasure or pain for another fear or
pleasure or pain, which are measured like coins, the greater with
the less, is not the exchange of virtue. O my dear Simmias, is there
not one true coin for which all things ought to exchange?-and that
is wisdom; and only in exchange for this, and in company with this, is
anything truly bought or sold, whether courage or temperance or
justice. And is not all true virtue the companion of wisdom, no matter
what fears or pleasures or other similar goods or evils may or may not
attend her? But the virtue which is made up of these goods, when
they are severed from wisdom and exchanged with one another, is a
shadow of virtue only, nor is there any freedom or health or truth
in her; but in the true exchange there is a purging away of all
these things, and temperance, and justice, and courage, and wisdom
herself are a purgation of them. And I conceive that the founders of
the mysteries had a real meaning and were not mere triflers when
they intimated in a figure long ago that he who passes unsanctified
and uninitiated into the world below will live in a slough, but that
he who arrives there after initiation and purification will dwell with
the gods. For "many," as they say in the mysteries, "are the thyrsus
bearers, but few are the mystics,"-meaning, as I interpret the
words, the true philosophers. In the number of whom I have been
seeking, according to my ability, to find a place during my whole
life; whether I have sought in a right way or not, and whether I
have succeeded or not, I shall truly know in a little while, if God
will, when I myself arrive in the other world: that is my belief.
And now, Simmias and Cebes, I have answered those who charge me with
not grieving or repining at parting from you and my masters in this
world; and I am right in not repining, for I believe that I shall find
other masters and friends who are as good in the world below. But
all men cannot believe this, and I shall be glad if my words have
any more success with you than with the judges of the Athenians.
  Cebes answered: I agree, Socrates, in the greater part of what you
say. But in what relates to the soul, men are apt to be incredulous;
they fear that when she leaves the body her place may be nowhere,
and that on the very day of death she may be destroyed and
perish-immediately on her release from the body, issuing forth like
smoke or air and vanishing away into nothingness. For if she could
only hold together and be herself after she was released from the
evils of the body, there would be good reason to hope, Socrates,
that what you say is true. But much persuasion and many arguments
are required in order to prove that when the man is dead the soul
yet exists, and has any force of intelligence.
  True, Cebes, said Socrates; and shall I suggest that we talk a
little of the probabilities of these things?
  I am sure, said Cebes, that I should gready like to know your
opinion about them.
  I reckon, said Socrates, that no one who heard me now, not even if
he were one of my old enemies, the comic poets, could accuse me of
idle talking about matters in which I have no concern. Let us, then,
if you please, proceed with the inquiry.
  Whether the souls of men after death are or are not in the world
below, is a question which may be argued in this manner: The ancient
doctrine of which I have been speaking affirms that they go from
this into the other world, and return hither, and are born from the
dead. Now if this be true, and the living come from the dead, then our
souls must be in the other world, for if not, how could they be born
again? And this would be conclusive, if there were any real evidence
that the living are only born from the dead; but if there is no
evidence of this, then other arguments will have to be adduced.
  That is very true, replied Cebes.
  Then let us consider this question, not in relation to man only, but
in relation to animals generally, and to plants, and to everything
of which there is generation, and the proof will be easier. Are not
all things which have opposites generated out of their opposites? I
mean such things as good and evil, just and unjust-and there are
innumerable other opposites which are generated out of opposites.
And I want to show that this holds universally of all opposites; I
mean to say, for example, that anything which becomes greater must
become greater after being less.
  True.
  And that which becomes less must have been once greater and then
become less.
  Yes.
  And the weaker is generated from the stronger, and the swifter
from the slower.
  Very true.
  And the worse is from the better, and the more just is from the more
unjust.
  Of course.
  And is this true of all opposites? and are we convinced that all
of them are generated out of opposites?
  Yes.
  And in this universal opposition of all things, are there not also
two intermediate processes which are ever going on, from one to the
other, and back again; where there is a greater and a less there is
also an intermediate process of increase and diminution, and that
which grows is said to wax, and that which decays to wane?
  Yes, he said.
  And there are many other processes, such as division and
composition, cooling and heating, which equally involve a passage into
and out of one another. And this holds of all opposites, even though
not always expressed in words-they are generated out of one another,
and there is a passing or process from one to the other of them?
  Very true, he replied.
  Well, and is there not an opposite of life, as sleep is the opposite
of waking?
  True, he said.
  And what is that?
  Death, he answered.
  And these, then, are generated, if they are opposites, the one
from the other, and have there their two intermediate processes also?
  Of course.
  Now, said Socrates, I will analyze one of the two pairs of opposites
which I have mentioned to you, and also its intermediate processes,
and you shall analyze the other to me. The state of sleep is opposed
to the state of waking, and out of sleeping waking is generated, and
out of waking, sleeping, and the process of generation is in the one
case falling asleep, and in the other waking up. Are you agreed
about that?
  Quite agreed.
  Then suppose that you analyze life and death to me in the same
manner. Is not death opposed to life?
  Yes.
  And they are generated one from the other?
  Yes.
  What is generated from life?
  Death.
  And what from death?
  I can only say in answer-life.
  Then the living, whether things or persons, Cebes, are generated
from the dead?
  That is clear, he replied.
  Then the inference is, that our souls are in the world below?
  That is true.
  And one of the two processes or generations is visible-for surely
the act of dying is visible?
  Surely, he said.
  And may not the other be inferred as the complement of nature, who
is not to be supposed to go on one leg only? And if not, a
corresponding process of generation in death must also be assigned
to her?
  Certainly, he replied.
  And what is that process?
  Revival.
  And revival, if there be such a thing, is the birth of the dead into
the world of the living?
  Quite true.
  Then there is a new way in which we arrive at the inference that the
living come from the dead, just as the dead come from the living;
and if this is true, then the souls of the dead must be in some
place out of which they come again. And this, as I think, has been
satisfactorily proved.
  Yes, Socrates, he said; all this seems to flow necessarily out of
our previous admissions.
  And that these admissions are not unfair, Cebes, he said, may be
shown, as I think, in this way: If generation were in a straight
line only, and there were no compensation or circle in nature, no turn
or return into one another, then you know that all things would at
last have the same form and pass into the same state, and there
would be no more generation of them.
  What do you mean? he said.
  A simple thing enough, which I will illustrate by the case of sleep,
he replied. You know that if there were no compensation of sleeping
and waking, the story of the sleeping Endymion would in the end have
no meaning, because all other things would be asleep, too, and he
would not be thought of. Or if there were composition only, and no
division of substances, then the chaos of Anaxagoras would come again.
And in like manner, my dear Cebes, if all things which partook of life
were to die, and after they were dead remained in the form of death,
and did not come to life again, all would at last die, and nothing
would be alive-how could this be otherwise? For if the living spring
from any others who are not the dead, and they die, must not all
things at last be swallowed up in death?
  There is no escape from that, Socrates, said Cebes; and I think that
what you say is entirely true.
  Yes, he said, Cebes, I entirely think so, too; and we are not
walking in a vain imagination; but I am confident in the belief that
there truly is such a thing as living again, and that the living
spring from the dead, and that the souls of the dead are in existence,
and that the good souls have a better portion than the evil.
  Cebes added: Your favorite doctrine, Socrates, that knowledge is
simply recollection, if true, also necessarily implies a previous time
in which we learned that which we now recollect. But this would be
impossible unless our soul was in some place before existing in the
human form; here, then, is another argument of the soul's immortality.
  But tell me, Cebes, said Simmias, interposing, what proofs are given
of this doctrine of recollection? I am not very sure at this moment
that I remember them.
  One excellent proof, said Cebes, is afforded by questions. If you
put a question to a person in a right way, he will give a true
answer of himself; but how could he do this unless there were
knowledge and right reason already in him? And this is most clearly
shown when he is taken to a diagram or to anything of that sort.
  But if, said Socrates, you are still incredulous, Simmias, I would
ask you whether you may not agree with me when you look at the
matter in another way; I mean, if you are still incredulous as to
whether knowledge is recollection.
  Incredulous, I am not, said Simmias; but I want to have this
doctrine of recollection brought to my own recollection, and, from
what Cebes has said, I am beginning to recollect and be convinced; but
I should still like to hear what more you have to say.
  This is what I would say, he replied: We should agree, if I am not
mistaken, that what a man recollects he must have known at some
previous time.
  Very true.
  And what is the nature of this recollection? And, in asking this,
I mean to ask whether, when a person has already seen or heard or in
any way perceived anything, and he knows not only that, but
something else of which he has not the same, but another knowledge, we
may not fairly say that he recollects that which comes into his
mind. Are we agreed about that?
  What do you mean?
  I mean what I may illustrate by the following instance: The
knowledge of a lyre is not the same as the knowledge of a man?
  True.
  And yet what is the feeling of lovers when they recognize a lyre, or
a garment, or anything else which the beloved has been in the habit of
using? Do not they, from knowing the lyre, form in the mind's eye an
image of the youth to whom the lyre belongs? And this is recollection:
and in the same way anyone who sees Simmias may remember Cebes; and
there are endless other things of the same nature.
  Yes, indeed, there are-endless, replied Simmias.
  And this sort of thing, he said, is recollection, and is most
commonly a process of recovering that which has been forgotten through
time and inattention.
  Very true, he said.
  Well; and may you not also from seeing the picture of a horse or a
lyre remember a man? and from the picture of Simmias, you may be led
to remember Cebes?
  True.
  Or you may also be led to the recollection of Simmias himself?
  True, he said.
  And in all these cases, the recollection may be derived from
things either like or unlike?
  That is true.
  And when the recollection is derived from like things, then there is
sure to be another question, which is, whether the likeness of that
which is recollected is in any way defective or not.
  Very true, he said.
  And shall we proceed a step further, and affirm that there is such a
thing as equality, not of wood with wood, or of stone with stone,
but that, over and above this, there is equality in the abstract?
Shall we affirm this?
  Affirm, yes, and swear to it, replied Simmias, with all the
confidence in life.
  And do we know the nature of this abstract essence?
  To be sure, he said.
  And whence did we obtain this knowledge? Did we not see equalities
of material things, such as pieces of wood and stones, and gather from
them the idea of an equality which is different from them?-you will
admit that? Or look at the matter again in this way: Do not the same
pieces of wood or stone appear at one time equal, and at another
time unequal?
  That is certain.
  But are real equals ever unequal? or is the idea of equality ever
inequality?
  That surely was never yet known, Socrates.
  Then these (so-called) equals are not the same with the idea of
equality?
  I should say, clearly not, Socrates.
  And yet from these equals, although differing from the idea of
equality, you conceived and attained that idea?
  Very true, he said.
  Which might be like, or might be unlike them?
  Yes.
  But that makes no difference; whenever from seeing one thing you
conceived another, whether like or unlike, there must surely have been
an act of recollection?
  Very true.
  But what would you say of equal portions of wood and stone, or other
material equals? and what is the impression produced by them? Are they
equals in the same sense as absolute equality? or do they fall short
of this in a measure?
  Yes, he said, in a very great measure, too.
  And must we not allow that when I or anyone look at any object,
and perceive that the object aims at being some other thing, but falls
short of, and cannot attain to it-he who makes this observation must
have had previous knowledge of that to which, as he says, the other,
although similar, was inferior?
  Certainly.
  And has not this been our case in the matter of equals and of
absolute equality?
  Precisely.
  Then we must have known absolute equality previously to the time
when we first saw the material equals, and reflected that all these
apparent equals aim at this absolute equality, but fall short of it?
  That is true.
  And we recognize also that this absolute equality has only been
known, and can only be known, through the medium of sight or touch, or
of some other sense. And this I would affirm of all such conceptions.
  Yes, Socrates, as far as the argument is concerned, one of them is
the same as the other.
  And from the senses, then, is derived the knowledge that all
sensible things aim at an idea of equality of which they fall short-is
not that true?
  Yes.
  Then before we began to see or hear or perceive in any way, we
must have had a knowledge of absolute equality, or we could not have
referred to that the equals which are derived from the senses-for to
that they all aspire, and of that they fall short?
  That, Socrates, is certainly to be inferred from the previous
statements.
  And did we not see and hear and acquire our other senses as soon
as we were born?
  Certainly.
  Then we must have acquired the knowledge of the ideal equal at
some time previous to this?
  Yes.
  That is to say, before we were born, I suppose?
  True.
  And if we acquired this knowledge before we were born, and were born
having it, then we also knew before we were born and at the instant of
birth not only equal or the greater or the less, but all other
ideas; for we are not speaking only of equality absolute, but of
beauty, goodness, justice, holiness, and all which we stamp with the
name of essence in the dialectical process, when we ask and answer
questions. Of all this we may certainly affirm that we acquired the
knowledge before birth?
  That is true.
  But if, after having acquired, we have not forgotten that which we
acquired, then we must always have been born with knowledge, and shall
always continue to know as long as life lasts-for knowing is the
acquiring and retaining knowledge and not forgetting. Is not
forgetting, Simmias, just the losing of knowledge?
  Quite true, Socrates.
  But if the knowledge which we acquired before birth was lost by us
at birth, and afterwards by the use of the senses we recovered that
which we previously knew, will not that which we call learning be a
process of recovering our knowledge, and may not this be rightly
termed recollection by us?
  Very true.
  For this is clear, that when we perceived something, either by the
help of sight or hearing, or some other sense, there was no difficulty
in receiving from this a conception of some other thing like or unlike
which had been forgotten and which was associated with this; and
therefore, as I was saying, one of two alternatives follows: either we
had this knowledge at birth, and continued to know through life; or,
after birth, those who are said to learn only remember, and learning
is recollection only.
  Yes, that is quite true, Socrates.
  And which alternative, Simmias, do you prefer? Had we the
knowledge at our birth, or did we remember afterwards the things which
we knew previously to our birth?
  I cannot decide at the moment.
  At any rate you can decide whether he who has knowledge ought or
ought not to be able to give a reason for what he knows.
  Certainly, he ought.
  But do you think that every man is able to give a reason about these
very matters of which we are speaking?
  I wish that they could, Socrates, but I greatly fear that
to-morrow at this time there will be no one able to give a reason
worth having.
  Then you are not of opinion, Simmias, that all men know these
things?
  Certainly not.
  Then they are in process of recollecting that which they learned
before.
  Certainly.
  But when did our souls acquire this knowledge?-not since we were
born as men?
  Certainly not.
  And therefore previously?
  Yes.
  Then, Simmias, our souls must have existed before they were in the
form of man-without bodies, and must have had intelligence.
  Unless indeed you suppose, Socrates, that these notions were given
us at the moment of birth; for this is the only time that remains.
  Yes, my friend, but when did we lose them? for they are not in us
when we are born-that is admitted. Did we lose them at the moment of
receiving them, or at some other time?
  No, Socrates, I perceive that I was unconsciously talking nonsense.
  Then may we not say, Simmias, that if, as we are always repeating,
there is an absolute beauty, and goodness, and essence in general, and
to this, which is now discovered to be a previous condition of our
being, we refer all our sensations, and with this compare
them-assuming this to have a prior existence, then our souls must have
had a prior existence, but if not, there would be no force in the
argument? There can be no doubt that if these absolute ideas existed
before we were born, then our souls must have existed before we were
born, and if not the ideas, then not the souls.
  Yes, Socrates; I am convinced that there is precisely the same
necessity for the existence of the soul before birth, and of the
essence of which you are speaking: and the argument arrives at a
result which happily agrees with my own notion. For there is nothing
which to my mind is so evident as that beauty, goodness, and other
notions of which you were just now speaking have a most real and
absolute existence; and I am satisfied with the proof.
  Well, but is Cebes equally satisfied? for I must convince him too.
  I think, said Simmias, that Cebes is satisfied: although he is the
most incredulous of mortals, yet I believe that he is convinced of the
existence of the soul before birth. But that after death the soul will
continue to exist is not yet proven even to my own satisfaction. I
cannot get rid of the feeling of the many to which Cebes was
referring-the feeling that when the man dies the soul may be
scattered, and that this may be the end of her. For admitting that she
may be generated and created in some other place, and may have existed
before entering the human body, why after having entered in and gone
out again may she not herself be destroyed and come to an end?
  Very true, Simmias, said Cebes; that our soul existed before we were
born was the first half of the argument, and this appears to have been
proven; that the soul will exist after death as well as before birth
is the other half of which the proof is still wanting, and has to be
supplied.
  But that proof, Simmias and Cebes, has been already given, said
Socrates, if you put the two arguments together-I mean this and the
former one, in which we admitted that everything living is born of the
dead. For if the soul existed before birth, and in coming to life
and being born can be born only from death and dying, must she not
after death continue to exist, since she has to be born again?
surely the proof which you desire has been already furnished. Still
I suspect that you and Simmias would be glad to probe the argument
further; like children, you are haunted with a fear that when the soul
leaves the body, the wind may really blow her away and scatter her;
especially if a man should happen to die in stormy weather and not
when the sky is calm.
  Cebes answered with a smile: Then, Socrates, you must argue us out
of our fears-and yet, strictly speaking, they are not our fears, but
there is a child within us to whom death is a sort of hobgoblin; him
too we must persuade not to be afraid when he is alone with him in the
dark.
  Socrates said: Let the voice of the charmer be applied daily until
you have charmed him away.
  And where shall we find a good charmer of our fears, Socrates,
when you are gone?
  Hellas, he replied, is a large place, Cebes, and has many good
men, and there are barbarous races not a few: seek for him among
them all, far and wide, sparing neither pains nor money; for there
is no better way of using your money. And you must not forget to
seek for him among yourselves too; for he is nowhere more likely to be
found.
  The search, replied Cebes, shall certainly be made. And now, if
you please, let us return to the point of the argument at which we
digressed.
  By all means, replied Socrates; what else should I please?
  Very good, he said.
  Must we not, said Socrates, ask ourselves some question of this
sort?-What is that which, as we imagine, is liable to be scattered
away, and about which we fear? and what again is that about which we
have no fear? And then we may proceed to inquire whether that which
suffers dispersion is or is not of the nature of soul-our hopes and
fears as to our own souls will turn upon that.
  That is true, he said.
  Now the compound or composite may be supposed to be naturally
capable of being dissolved in like manner as of being compounded;
but that which is uncompounded, and that only, must be, if anything
is, indissoluble.
  Yes; that is what I should imagine, said Cebes.
  And the uncompounded may be assumed to be the same and unchanging,
where the compound is always changing and never the same?
  That I also think, he said.
  Then now let us return to the previous discussion. Is that idea or
essence, which in the dialectical process we define as essence of true
existence-whether essence of equality, beauty, or anything else: are
these essences, I say, liable at times to some degree of change? or
are they each of them always what they are, having the same simple,
self-existent and unchanging forms, and not admitting of variation
at all, or in any way, or at any time?
  They must be always the same, Socrates, replied Cebes.
  And what would you say of the many beautiful-whether men or horses
or garments or any other things which may be called equal or
beautiful-are they all unchanging and the same always, or quite the
reverse? May they not rather be described as almost always changing
and hardly ever the same either with themselves or with one another?
  The latter, replied Cebes; they are always in a state of change.
  And these you can touch and see and perceive with the senses, but
the unchanging things you can only perceive with the mind-they are
invisible and are not seen?
  That is very true, he said.
  Well, then, he added, let us suppose that there are two sorts of
existences, one seen, the other unseen.
  Let us suppose them.
  The seen is the changing, and the unseen is the unchanging.
  That may be also supposed.
  And, further, is not one part of us body, and the rest of us soul?
  To be sure.
  And to which class may we say that the body is more alike and akin?
  Clearly to the seen: no one can doubt that.
  And is the soul seen or not seen?
  Not by man, Socrates.
  And by "seen" and "not seen" is meant by us that which is or is
not visible to the eye of man?
  Yes, to the eye of man.
  And what do we say of the soul? is that seen or not seen?
  Not seen.
  Unseen then?
  Yes.
  Then the soul is more like to the unseen, and the body to the seen?
  That is most certain, Socrates.
  And were we not saying long ago that the soul when using the body as
an instrument of perception, that is to say, when using the sense of
sight or hearing or some other sense (for the meaning of perceiving
through the body is perceiving through the senses)-were we not
saying that the soul too is then dragged by the body into the region
of the changeable, and wanders and is confused; the world spins
round her, and she is like a drunkard when under their influence?
  Very true.
  But when returning into herself she reflects; then she passes into
the realm of purity, and eternity, and immortality, and
unchangeableness, which are her kindred, and with them she ever lives,
when she is by herself and is not let or hindered; then she ceases
from her erring ways, and being in communion with the unchanging is
unchanging. And this state of the soul is called wisdom?
  That is well and truly said, Socrates, he replied.
  And to which class is the soul more nearly alike and akin, as far as
may be inferred from this argument, as well as from the preceding one?
  I think, Socrates, that, in the opinion of everyone who follows
the argument, the soul will be infinitely more like the unchangeable
even the most stupid person will not deny that.
  And the body is more like the changing?
  Yes.
  Yet once more consider the matter in this light: When the soul and
the body are united, then nature orders the soul to rule and govern,
and the body to obey and serve.
  Now which of these two functions is akin to the divine? and which to
the mortal? Does not the divine appear to you to be that which
naturally orders and rules, and the mortal that which is subject and
servant?
  True.
  And which does the soul resemble?
  The soul resembles the divine and the body the mortal-there can be
no doubt of that, Socrates.
  Then reflect, Cebes: is not the conclusion of the whole matter
this?-that the soul is in the very likeness of the divine, and
immortal, and intelligible, and uniform, and indissoluble, and
unchangeable; and the body is in the very likeness of the human, and
mortal, and unintelligible, and multiform, and dissoluble, and
changeable. Can this, my dear Cebes, be denied?
  No, indeed.
  But if this is true, then is not the body liable to speedy
dissolution?
  and is not the soul almost or altogether indissoluble?
  Certainly.
  And do you further observe, that after a man is dead, the body,
which is the visible part of man, and has a visible framework, which
is called a corpse, and which would naturally be dissolved and
decomposed and dissipated, is not dissolved or decomposed at once, but
may remain for a good while, if the constitution be sound at the
time of death, and the season of the year favorable? For the body when
shrunk and embalmed, as is the custom in Egypt, may remain almost
entire through infinite ages; and even in decay, still there are
some portions, such as the bones and ligaments, which are
practically indestructible. You allow that?
  Yes.
  And are we to suppose that the soul, which is invisible, in
passing to the true Hades, which like her is invisible, and pure,
and noble, and on her way to the good and wise God, whither, if God
will, my soul is also soon to go-that the soul, I repeat, if this be
her nature and origin, is blown away and perishes immediately on
quitting the body as the many say? That can never be, dear Simmias and
Cebes. The truth rather is that the soul which is pure at departing
draws after her no bodily taint, having never voluntarily had
connection with the body, which she is ever avoiding, herself gathered
into herself (for such abstraction has been the study of her life).
And what does this mean but that she has been a true disciple of
philosophy and has practised how to die easily? And is not
philosophy the practice of death?
  Certainly.
  That soul, I say, herself invisible, departs to the invisible
worldto the divine and immortal and rational: thither arriving, she
lives in bliss and is released from the error and folly of men,
their fears and wild passions and all other human ills, and forever
dwells, as they say of the initiated, in company with the gods. Is not
this true, Cebes?
  Yes, said Cebes, beyond a doubt.
  But the soul which has been polluted, and is impure at the time of
her departure, and is the companion and servant of the body always,
and is in love with and fascinated by the body and by the desires
and pleasures of the body, until she is led to believe that the
truth only exists in a bodily form, which a man may touch and see
and taste and use for the purposes of his lusts-the soul, I mean,
accustomed to hate and fear and avoid the intellectual principle,
which to the bodily eye is dark and invisible, and can be attained
only by philosophy-do you suppose that such a soul as this will depart
pure and unalloyed?
  That is impossible, he replied.
  She is engrossed by the corporeal, which the continual association
and constant care of the body have made natural to her.
  Very true.
  And this, my friend, may be conceived to be that heavy, weighty,
earthy element of sight by which such a soul is depressed and
dragged down again into the visible world, because she is afraid of
the invisible and of the world below-prowling about tombs and
sepulchres, in the neighborhood of which, as they tell us, are seen
certain ghostly apparitions of souls which have not departed pure, but
are cloyed with sight and therefore visible.
  That is very likely, Socrates.
  Yes, that is very likely, Cebes; and these must be the souls, not of
the good, but of the evil, who are compelled to wander about such
places in payment of the penalty of their former evil way of life; and
they continue to wander until the desire which haunts them is
satisfied and they are imprisoned in another body. And they may be
supposed to be fixed in the same natures which they had in their
former life.
  What natures do you mean, Socrates?
  I mean to say that men who have followed after gluttony, and
wantonness, and drunkenness, and have had no thought of avoiding them,
would pass into asses and animals of that sort. What do you think?
  I think that exceedingly probable.
  And those who have chosen the portion of injustice, and tyranny, and
violence, will pass into wolves, or into hawks and kites; whither else
can we suppose them to go?
  Yes, said Cebes; that is doubtless the place of natures such as
theirs. And there is no difficulty, he said, in assigning to all of
them places answering to their several natures and propensities?
  There is not, he said.
  Even among them some are happier than others; and the happiest
both in themselves and their place of abode are those who have
practised the civil and social virtues which are called temperance and
justice, and are acquired by habit and attention without philosophy
and mind.
  Why are they the happiest?
  Because they may be expected to pass into some gentle, social nature
which is like their own, such as that of bees or ants, or even back
again into the form of man, and just and moderate men spring from
them.
  That is not impossible.
  But he who is a philosopher or lover of learning, and is entirely
pure at departing, is alone permitted to reach the gods. And this is
the reason, Simmias and Cebes, why the true votaries of philosophy
abstain from all fleshly lusts, and endure and refuse to give
themselves up to them-not because they fear poverty or the ruin of
their families, like the lovers of money, and the world in general;
nor like the lovers of power and honor, because they dread the
dishonor or disgrace of evil deeds.
  No, Socrates, that would not become them, said Cebes.
  No, indeed, he replied; and therefore they who have a care of
their souls, and do not merely live in the fashions of the body, say
farewell to all this; they will not walk in the ways of the blind: and
when philosophy offers them purification and release from evil, they
feel that they ought not to resist her influence, and to her they
incline, and whither she leads they follow her.
  What do you mean, Socrates?
  I will tell you, he said. The lovers of knowledge are conscious that
their souls, when philosophy receives them, are simply fastened and
glued to their bodies: the soul is only able to view existence through
the bars of a prison, and not in her own nature; she is wallowing in
the mire of all ignorance; and philosophy, seeing the terrible
nature of her confinement, and that the captive through desire is
led to conspire in her own captivity (for the lovers of knowledge
are aware that this was the original state of the soul, and that
when she was in this state philosophy received and gently counseled
her, and wanted to release her, pointing out to her that the eye is
full of deceit, and also the ear and other senses, and persuading
her to retire from them in all but the necessary use of them and to be
gathered up and collected into herself, and to trust only to herself
and her own intuitions of absolute existence, and mistrust that
which comes to her through others and is subject to
vicissitude)-philosophy shows her that this is visible and tangible,
but that what she sees in her own nature is intellectual and
invisible. And the soul of the true philosopher thinks that she
ought not to resist this deliverance, and therefore abstains from
pleasures and desires and pains and fears, as far as she is able;
reflecting that when a man has great joys or sorrows or fears or
desires he suffers from them, not the sort of evil which might be
anticipated-as, for example, the loss of his health or property, which
he has sacrificed to his lusts-but he has suffered an evil greater
far, which is the greatest and worst of all evils, and one of which he
never thinks.
  And what is that, Socrates? said Cebes.
  Why, this: When the feeling of pleasure or pain in the soul is
most intense, all of us naturally suppose that the object of this
intense feeling is then plainest and truest: but this is not the case.
  Very true.
  And this is the state in which the soul is most enthralled by the
body.
  How is that?
  Why, because each pleasure and pain is a sort of nail which nails
and rivets the soul to the body, and engrosses her and makes her
believe that to be true which the body affirms to be true; and from
agreeing with the body and having the same delights she is obliged
to have the same habits and ways, and is not likely ever to be pure at
her departure to the world below, but is always saturated with the
body; so that she soon sinks into another body and there germinates
and grows, and has therefore no part in the communion of the divine
and pure and simple.
  That is most true, Socrates, answered Cebes.
  And this, Cebes, is the reason why the true lovers of knowledge
are temperate and brave; and not for the reason which the world gives.
  Certainly not.
  Certainly not! For not in that way does the soul of a philosopher
reason; she will not ask philosophy to release her in order that
when released she may deliver herself up again to the thraldom of
pleasures and pains, doing a work only to be undone again, weaving
instead of unweaving her Penelope's web. But she will make herself a
calm of passion and follow Reason, and dwell in her, beholding the
true and divine (which is not matter of opinion), and thence derive
nourishment. Thus she seeks to live while she lives, and after death
she hopes to go to her own kindred and to be freed from human ills.
Never fear, Simmias and Cebes, that a soul which has been thus
nurtured and has had these pursuits, will at her departure from the
body be scattered and blown away by the winds and be nowhere and
nothing.
  When Socrates had done speaking, for a considerable time there was
silence; he himself and most of us appeared to be meditating on what
had been said; only Cebes and Simmias spoke a few words to one
another. And Socrates observing this asked them what they thought of
the argument, and whether there was anything wanting? For, said he,
much is still open to suspicion and attack, if anyone were disposed to
sift the matter thoroughly. If you are talking of something else I
would rather not interrupt you, but if you are still doubtful about
the argument do not hesitate to say exactly what you think, and let us
have anything better which you can suggest; and if I am likely to be
of any use, allow me to help you.
  Simmias said: I must confess, Socrates, that doubts did arise in our
minds, and each of us was urging and inciting the other to put the
question which he wanted to have answered and which neither of us
liked to ask, fearing that our importunity might be troublesome
under present circumstances.
  Socrates smiled and said: O Simmias, how strange that is; I am not
very likely to persuade other men that I do not regard my present
situation as a misfortune, if I am unable to persuade you, and you
will keep fancying that I am at all more troubled now than at any
other time. Will you not allow that I have as much of the spirit of
prophecy in me as the swans? For they, when they perceive that they
must die, having sung all their life long, do then sing more than
ever, rejoicing in the thought that they are about to go away to the
god whose ministers they are. But men, because they are themselves
afraid of death, slanderously affirm of the swans that they sing a
lament at the last, not considering that no bird sings when cold, or
hungry, or in pain, not even the nightingale, nor the swallow, nor yet
the hoopoe; which are said indeed to tune a lay of sorrow, although
I do not believe this to be true of them any more than of the swans.
But because they are sacred to Apollo and have the gift of prophecy
and anticipate the good things of another world, therefore they sing
and rejoice in that day more than they ever did before. And I, too,
believing myself to be the consecrated servant of the same God, and
the fellow servant of the swans, and thinking that I have received
from my master gifts of prophecy which are not inferior to theirs,
would not go out of life less merrily than the swans. Cease to mind
then about this, but speak and ask anything which you like, while
the eleven magistrates of Athens allow.
  Well, Socrates, said Simmias, then I will tell you my difficulty,
and Cebes will tell you his. For I dare say that you, Socrates,
feel, as I do, how very hard or almost impossible is the attainment of
any certainty about questions such as these in the present life. And
yet I should deem him a coward who did not prove what is said about
them to the uttermost, or whose heart failed him before he had
examined them on every side. For he should persevere until he has
attained one of two things: either he should discover or learn the
truth about them; or, if this is impossible, I would have him take the
best and most irrefragable of human notions, and let this be the
raft upon which he sails through life-not without risk, as I admit, if
he cannot find some word of God which will more surely and safely
carry him. And now, as you bid me, I will venture to question you,
as I should not like to reproach myself hereafter with not having said
at the time what I think. For when I consider the matter either
alone or with Cebes, the argument does certainly appear to me,
Socrates, to be not sufficient.
  Socrates answered: I dare say, my friend, that you may be right, but
I should like to know in what respect the argument is not sufficient.
  In this respect, replied Simmias: Might not a person use the same
argument about harmony and the lyre-might he not say that harmony is a
thing invisible, incorporeal, fair, divine, abiding in the lyre
which is harmonized, but that the lyre and the strings are matter
and material, composite, earthy, and akin to mortality? And when
someone breaks the lyre, or cuts and rends the strings, then he who
takes this view would argue as you do, and on the same analogy, that
the harmony survives and has not perished; for you cannot imagine,
as we would say, that the lyre without the strings, and the broken
strings themselves, remain, and yet that the harmony, which is of
heavenly and immortal nature and kindred, has perished-and perished
too before the mortal. The harmony, he would say, certainly exists
somewhere, and the wood and strings will decay before that decays. For
I suspect, Socrates, that the notion of the soul which we are all of
us inclined to entertain, would also be yours, and that you too
would conceive the body to be strung up, and held together, by the
elements of hot and cold, wet and dry, and the like, and that the soul
is the harmony or due proportionate admixture of them. And, if this is
true, the inference clearly is that when the strings of the body are
unduly loosened or overstrained through disorder or other injury, then
the soul, though most divine, like other harmonies of music or of
the works of art, of course perishes at once, although the material
remains of the body may last for a considerable time, until they are
either decayed or burnt. Now if anyone maintained that the soul, being
the harmony of the elements of the body, first perishes in that
which is called death, how shall we answer him?
  Socrates looked round at us as his manner was, and said, with a
smile: Simmias has reason on his side; and why does not some one of
you who is abler than myself answer him? for there is force in his
attack upon me. But perhaps, before we answer him, we had better
also hear what Cebes has to say against the argument-this will give us
time for reflection, and when both of them have spoken, we may
either assent to them if their words appear to be in consonance with
the truth, or if not, we may take up the other side, and argue with
them. Please to tell me then, Cebes, he said, what was the
difficulty which troubled you?
  Cebes said: I will tell you. My feeling is that the argument is
still in the same position, and open to the same objections which were
urged before; for I am ready to admit that the existence of the soul
before entering into the bodily form has been very ingeniously, and,
as I may be allowed to say, quite sufficiently proven; but the
existence of the soul after death is still, in my judgment,
unproven. Now my objection is not the same as that of Simmias; for I
am not disposed to deny that the soul is stronger and more lasting
than the body, being of opinion that in all such respects the soul
very far excels the body. Well, then, says the argument to me, why
do you remain unconvinced? When you see that the weaker is still in
existence after the man is dead, will you not admit that the more
lasting must also survive during the same period of time? Now I,
like Simmias, must employ a figure; and I shall ask you to consider
whether the figure is to the point. The parallel which I will
suppose is that of an old weaver, who dies, and after his death
somebody says: He is not dead, he must be alive; and he appeals to the
coat which he himself wove and wore, and which is still whole and
undecayed. And then he proceeds to ask of someone who is
incredulous, whether a man lasts longer, or the coat which is in use
and wear; and when he is answered that a man lasts far longer,
thinks that he has thus certainly demonstrated the survival of the
man, who is the more lasting, because the less lasting remains. But
that, Simmias, as I would beg you to observe, is not the truth;
everyone sees that he who talks thus is talking nonsense. For the
truth is that this weaver, having worn and woven many such coats,
though he outlived several of them, was himself outlived by the
last; but this is surely very far from proving that a man is
slighter and weaker than a coat. Now the relation of the body to the
soul may be expressed in a similar figure; for you may say with reason
that the soul is lasting, and the body weak and short-lived in
comparison. And every soul may be said to wear out many bodies,
especially in the course of a long life. For if while the man is alive
the body deliquesces and decays, and yet the soul always weaves her
garment anew and repairs the waste, then of course, when the soul
perishes, she must have on her last garment, and this only will
survive her; but then again when the soul is dead the body will at
last show its native weakness, and soon pass into decay. And therefore
this is an argument on which I would rather not rely as proving that
the soul exists after death. For suppose that we grant even more
than you affirm as within the range of possibility, and besides
acknowledging that the soul existed before birth admit also that after
death the souls of some are existing still, and will exist, and will
be born and die again and again, and that there is a natural
strength in the soul which will hold out and be born many times-for
all this, we may be still inclined to think that she will weary in the
labors of successive births, and may at last succumb in one of her
deaths and utterly perish; and this death and dissolution of the
body which brings destruction to the soul may be unknown to any of us,
for no one of us can have had any experience of it: and if this be
true, then I say that he who is confident in death has but a foolish
confidence, unless he is able to prove that the soul is altogether
immortal and imperishable. But if he is not able to prove this, he who
is about to die will always have reason to fear that when the body
is disunited, the soul also may utterly perish.
  All of us, as we afterwards remarked to one another, had an
unpleasant feeling at hearing them say this. When we had been so
firmly convinced before, now to have our faith shaken seemed to
introduce a confusion and uncertainty, not only into the previous
argument, but into any future one; either we were not good judges,
or there were no real grounds of belief.
  Ech. There I feel with you-indeed I do, Phaedo, and when you were
speaking, I was beginning to ask myself the same question: What
argument can I ever trust again? For what could be more convincing
than the argument of Socrates, which has now fallen into discredit?
That the soul is a harmony is a doctrine which has always had a
wonderful attraction for me, and, when mentioned, came back to me at
once, as my own original conviction. And now I must begin again and
find another argument which will assure me that when the man is dead
the soul dies not with him. Tell me, I beg, how did Socrates
proceed? Did he appear to share the unpleasant feeling which you
mention? or did he receive the interruption calmly and give a
sufficient answer? Tell us, as exactly as you can, what passed.
  Phaed. Often, Echecrates, as I have admired Socrates, I never
admired him more than at that moment. That he should be able to answer
was nothing, but what astonished me was, first, the gentle and
pleasant and approving manner in which he regarded the words of the
young men, and then his quick sense of the wound which had been
inflicted by the argument, and his ready application of the healing
art. He might be compared to a general rallying his defeated and
broken army, urging them to follow him and return to the field of
argument.
  Ech. How was that?
  Phaed. You shall hear, for I was close to him on his right hand,
seated on a sort of stool, and he on a couch which was a good deal
higher. Now he had a way of playing with my hair, and then he smoothed
my head, and pressed the hair upon my neck, and said: To-morrow,
Phaedo, I suppose that these fair locks of yours will be severed.
  Yes, Socrates, I suppose that they will, I replied.
  Not so if you will take my advice.
  What shall I do with them? I said.
  To-day, he replied, and not to-morrow, if this argument dies and
cannot be brought to life again by us, you and I will both shave our
locks; and if I were you, and could not maintain my ground against
Simmias and Cebes, I would myself take an oath, like the Argives,
not to wear hair any more until I had renewed the conflict and
defeated them.
  Yes, I said, but Heracles himself is said not to be a match for two.
  Summon me then, he said, and I will be your Iolaus until the sun
goes down.
  I summon you rather, I said, not as Heracles summoning Iolaus, but
as Iolaus might summon Heracles.
  That will be all the same, he said. But first let us take care
that we avoid a danger.
  And what is that? I said.
  The danger of becoming misologists, he replied, which is one of
the very worst things that can happen to us. For as there are
misanthropists or haters of men, there are also misologists or
haters of ideas, and both spring from the same cause, which is
ignorance of the world. Misanthropy arises from the too great
confidence of inexperience; you trust a man and think him altogether
true and good and faithful, and then in a little while he turns out to
be false and knavish; and then another and another, and when this
has happened several times to a man, especially within the circle of
his most trusted friends, as he deems them, and he has often quarreled
with them, he at last hates all men, and believes that no one has
any good in him at all. I dare say that you must have observed this.
  Yes, I said.
  And is not this discreditable? The reason is that a man, having to
deal with other men, has no knowledge of them; for if he had knowledge
he would have known the true state of the case, that few are the
good and few the evil, and that the great majority are in the interval
between them.
  How do you mean? I said.
  I mean, he replied, as you might say of the very large and very
small, that nothing is more uncommon than a very large or a very small
man; and this applies generally to all extremes, whether of great
and small, or swift and slow, or fair and foul, or black and white:
and whether the instances you select be men or dogs or anything
else, few are the extremes, but many are in the mean between them. Did
you never observe this?
  Yes, I said, I have.
  And do you not imagine, he said, that if there were a competition of
evil, the first in evil would be found to be very few?
  Yes, that is very likely, I said.
  Yes, that is very likely, he replied; not that in this respect
arguments are like men-there I was led on by you to say more than I
had intended; but the point of comparison was that when a simple man
who has no skill in dialectics believes an argument to be true which
he afterwards imagines to be false, whether really false or not, and
then another and another, he has no longer any faith left, and great
disputers, as you know, come to think, at last that they have grown to
be the wisest of mankind; for they alone perceive the utter
unsoundness and instability of all arguments, or, indeed, of all
things, which, like the currents in the Euripus, are going up and down
in never-ceasing ebb and flow.
  That is quite true, I said.
  Yes, Phaedo, he replied, and very melancholy too, if there be such a
thing as truth or certainty or power of knowing at all, that a man
should have lighted upon some argument or other which at first
seemed true and then turned out to be false, and instead of blaming
himself and his own want of wit, because he is annoyed, should at last
be too glad to transfer the blame from himself to arguments in
general; and forever afterwards should hate and revile them, and
lose the truth and knowledge of existence.
  Yes, indeed, I said; that is very melancholy.
  Let us, then, in the first place, he said, be careful of admitting
into our souls the notion that there is no truth or health or
soundness in any arguments at all; but let us rather say that there is
as yet no health in us, and that we must quit ourselves like men and
do our best to gain health-you and all other men with a view to the
whole of your future life, and I myself with a view to death. For at
this moment I am sensible that I have not the temper of a philosopher;
like the vulgar, I am only a partisan. For the partisan, when he is
engaged in a dispute, cares nothing about the rights of the
question, but is anxious only to convince his hearers of his own
assertions. And the difference between him and me at the present
moment is only this-that whereas he seeks to convince his hearers that
what he says is true, I am rather seeking to convince myself; to
convince my hearers is a secondary matter with me. And do but see
how much I gain by this. For if what I say is true, then I do well
to be persuaded of the truth, but if there be nothing after death,
still, during the short time that remains, I shall save my friends
from lamentations, and my ignorance will not last, and therefore no
harm will be done. This is the state of mind, Simmias and Cebes, in
which I approach the argument. And I would ask you to be thinking of
the truth and not of Socrates: agree with me, if I seem to you to be
speaking the truth; or if not, withstand me might and main, that I may
not deceive you as well as myself in my enthusiasm, and, like the bee,
leave my sting in you before I die.
  And now let us proceed, he said. And first of all let me be sure
that I have in my mind what you were saying. Simmias, if I remember
rightly, has fears and misgivings whether the soul, being in the
form of harmony, although a fairer and diviner thing than the body,
may not perish first. On the other hand, Cebes appeared to grant
that the soul was more lasting than the body, but he said that no
one could know whether the soul, after having worn out many bodies,
might not perish herself and leave her last body behind her; and
that this is death, which is the destruction not of the body but of
the soul, for in the body the work of destruction is ever going on.
Are not these, Simmias and Cebes, the points which we have to
consider?
  They both agreed to this statement of them.
  He proceeded: And did you deny the force of the whole preceding
argument, or of a part only?
  Of a part only, they replied.
  And what did you think, he said, of that part of the argument in
which we said that knowledge was recollection only, and inferred
from this that the soul must have previously existed somewhere else
before she was enclosed in the body? Cebes said that he had been
wonderfully impressed by that part of the argument, and that his
conviction remained unshaken. Simmias agreed, and added that he
himself could hardly imagine the possibility of his ever thinking
differently about that.
  But, rejoined Socrates, you will have to think differently, my
Theban friend, if you still maintain that harmony is a compound, and
that the soul is a harmony which is made out of strings set in the
frame of the body; for you will surely never allow yourself to say
that a harmony is prior to the elements which compose the harmony.
  No, Socrates, that is impossible.
  But do you not see that you are saying this when you say that the
soul existed before she took the form and body of man, and was made up
of elements which as yet had no existence? For harmony is not a sort
of thing like the soul, as you suppose; but first the lyre, and the
strings, and the sounds exist in a state of discord, and then
harmony is made last of all, and perishes first. And how can such a
notion of the soul as this agree with the other?
  Not at all, replied Simmias.
  And yet, he said, there surely ought to be harmony when harmony is
the theme of discourse.
  There ought, replied Simmias.
  But there is no harmony, he said, in the two propositions that
knowledge is recollection, and that the soul is a harmony. Which of
them, then, will you retain?
  I think, he replied, that I have a much stronger faith, Socrates, in
the first of the two, which has been fully demonstrated to me, than in
the latter, which has not been demonstrated at all, but rests only
on probable and plausible grounds; and I know too well that these
arguments from probabilities are impostors, and unless great caution
is observed in the use of them they are apt to be deceptive-in
geometry, and in other things too. But the doctrine of knowledge and
recollection has been proven to me on trustworthy grounds; and the
proof was that the soul must have existed before she came into the
body, because to her belongs the essence of which the very name
implies existence. Having, as I am convinced, rightly accepted this
conclusion, and on sufficient grounds, I must, as I suppose, cease
to argue or allow others to argue that the soul is a harmony.
  Let me put the matter, Simmias, he said, in another point of view:
Do you imagine that a harmony or any other composition can be in a
state other than that of the elements out of which it is compounded?
  Certainly not.
  Or do or suffer anything other than they do or suffer?
  He agreed.
  Then a harmony does not lead the parts or elements which make up the
harmony, but only follows them.
  He assented.
  For harmony cannot possibly have any motion, or sound, or other
quality which is opposed to the parts.
  That would be impossible, he replied.
  And does not every harmony depend upon the manner in which the
elements are harmonized?
  I do not understand you, he said.
  I mean to say that a harmony admits of degrees, and is more of a
harmony, and more completely a harmony, when more completely
harmonized, if that be possible; and less of a harmony, and less
completely a harmony, when less harmonized.
  True.
  But does the soul admit of degrees? or is one soul in the very least
degree more or less, or more or less completely, a soul than another?
  Not in the least.
  Yet surely one soul is said to have intelligence and virtue, and
to be good, and another soul is said to have folly and vice, and to be
an evil soul: and this is said truly?
  Yes, truly.
  But what will those who maintain the soul to be a harmony say of
this presence of virtue and vice in the soul?-Will they say that there
is another harmony, and another discord, and that the virtuous soul is
harmonized, and herself being a harmony has another harmony within
her, and that the vicious soul is inharmonical and has no harmony
within her?
  I cannot say, replied Simmias; but I suppose that something of
that kind would be asserted by those who take this view.
  And the admission is already made that no soul is more a soul than
another; and this is equivalent to admitting that harmony is not
more or less harmony, or more or less completely a harmony?
  Quite true.
  And that which is not more or less a harmony is not more or less
harmonized?
  True.
  And that which is not more or less harmonized cannot have more or
less of harmony, but only an equal harmony?
  Yes, an equal harmony.
  Then one soul not being more or less absolutely a soul than another,
is not more or less harmonized?
  Exactly.
  And therefore has neither more nor less of harmony or of discord?
  She has not.
  And having neither more nor less of harmony or of discord, one
soul has no more vice or virtue than another, if vice be discord and
virtue harmony?
  Not at all more.
  Or speaking more correctly, Simmias, the soul, if she is a
harmony, will never have any vice; because a harmony, being absolutely
a harmony, has no part in the inharmonical?
  No.
  And therefore a soul which is absolutely a soul has no vice?
  How can she have, consistently with the preceding argument?
  Then, according to this, if the souls of all animals are equally and
absolutely souls, they will be equally good?
  I agree with you, Socrates, he said.
  And can all this be true, think you? he said; and are all these
consequences admissible-which nevertheless seem to follow from the
assumption that the soul is a harmony?
  Certainly not, he said.
  Once more, he said, what ruling principle is there of human things
other than the soul, and especially the wise soul? Do you know of any?
  Indeed, I do not.
  And is the soul in agreement with the affections of the body? or
is she at variance with them? For example, when the body is hot and
thirsty, does not the soul incline us against drinking? and when the
body is hungry, against eating? And this is only one instance out of
ten thousand of the opposition of the soul to the things of the body.
  Very true.
  But we have already acknowledged that the soul, being a harmony, can
never utter a note at variance with the tensions and relaxations and
vibrations and other affections of the strings out of which she is
composed; she can only follow, she cannot lead them?
  Yes, he said, we acknowledged that, certainly.
  And yet do we not now discover the soul to be doing the exact
opposite-leading the elements of which she is believed to be composed;
almost always opposing and coercing them in all sorts of ways
throughout life, sometimes more violently with the pains of medicine
and gymnastic; then again more gently; threatening and also
reprimanding the desires, passions, fears, as if talking to a thing
which is not herself, as Homer in the "Odyssey" represents Odysseus
doing in the words,

     "He beat his breast, and thus reproached his heart:
     Endure, my heart; far worse hast thou endured!"

Do you think that Homer could have written this under the idea that
the soul is a harmony capable of being led by the affections of the
body, and not rather of a nature which leads and masters them; and
herself a far diviner thing than any harmony?
  Yes, Socrates, I quite agree to that.
  Then, my friend, we can never be right in saying that the soul is
a harmony, for that would clearly contradict the divine Homer as
well as ourselves.
  True, he said.
  Thus much, said Socrates, of Harmonia, your Theban goddess, Cebes,
who has not been ungracious to us, I think; but what shall I say to
the Theban Cadmus, and how shall I propitiate him?
  I think that you will discover a way of propitiating him, said
Cebes; I am sure that you have answered the argument about harmony
in a manner that I could never have expected. For when Simmias
mentioned his objection, I quite imagined that no answer could be
given to him, and therefore I was surprised at finding that his
argument could not sustain the first onset of yours; and not
impossibly the other, whom you call Cadmus, may share a similar fate.
  Nay, my good friend, said Socrates, let us not boast, lest some evil
eye should put to flight the word which I am about to speak. That,
however, may be left in the hands of those above, while I draw near in
Homeric fashion, and try the mettle of your words. Briefly, the sum of
your objection is as follows: You want to have proven to you that
the soul is imperishable and immortal, and you think that the
philosopher who is confident in death has but a vain and foolish
confidence, if he thinks that he will fare better than one who has led
another sort of life, in the world below, unless he can prove this;
and you say that the demonstration of the strength and divinity of the
soul, and of her existence prior to our becoming men, does not
necessarily imply her immortality. Granting that the soul is
longlived, and has known and done much in a former state, still she is
not on that account immortal; and her entrance into the human form may
be a sort of disease which is the beginning of dissolution, and may at
last, after the toils of life are over, end in that which is called
death. And whether the soul enters into the body once only or many
times, that, as you would say, makes no difference in the fears of
individuals. For any man, who is not devoid of natural feeling, has
reason to fear, if he has no knowledge or proof of the soul's
immortality. That is what I suppose you to say, Cebes, which I
designedly repeat, in order that nothing may escape us, and that you
may, if you wish, add or subtract anything.
  But, said Cebes, as far as I can see at present, I have nothing to
add or subtract; you have expressed my meaning.
  Socrates paused awhile, and seemed to be absorbed in reflection.
At length he said: This is a very serious inquiry which you are
raising, Cebes, involving the whole question of generation and
corruption, about which I will, if you like, give you my own
experience; and you can apply this, if you think that anything which I
say will avail towards the solution of your difficulty.
  I should very much like, said Cebes, to hear what you have to say.
  Then I will tell you, said Socrates. When I was young, Cebes, I
had a prodigious desire to know that department of philosophy which is
called Natural Science; this appeared to me to have lofty aims, as
being the science which has to do with the causes of things, and which
teaches why a thing is, and is created and destroyed; and I was always
agitating myself with the consideration of such questions as these: Is
the growth of animals the result of some decay which the hot and
cold principle contracts, as some have said? Is the blood the
element with which we think, or the air, or the fire? or perhaps
nothing of this sort-but the brain may be the originating power of the
perceptions of hearing and sight and smell, and memory and opinion may
come from them, and science may be based on memory and opinion when no
longer in motion, but at rest. And then I went on to examine the decay
of them, and then to the things of heaven and earth, and at last I
concluded that I was wholly incapable of these inquiries, as I will
satisfactorily prove to you. For I was fascinated by them to such a
degree that my eyes grew blind to things that I had seemed to
myself, and also to others, to know quite well; and I forgot what I
had before thought to be self-evident, that the growth of man is the
result of eating and drinking; for when by the digestion of food flesh
is added to flesh and bone to bone, and whenever there is an
aggregation of congenial elements, the lesser bulk becomes larger
and the small man greater. Was not that a reasonable notion?
  Yes, said Cebes, I think so.
  Well; but let me tell you something more. There was a time when I
thought that I understood the meaning of greater and less pretty well;
and when I saw a great man standing by a little one I fancied that one
was taller than the other by a head; or one horse would appear to be
greater than another horse: and still more clearly did I seem to
perceive that ten is two more than eight, and that two cubits are more
than one, because two is twice one.
  And what is now your notion of such matters? said Cebes.
  I should be far enough from imagining, he replied, that I knew the
cause of any of them, indeed I should, for I cannot satisfy myself
that when one is added to one, the one to which the addition is made
becomes two, or that the two units added together make two by reason
of the addition. For I cannot understand how, when separated from
the other, each of them was one and not two, and now, when they are
brought together, the mere juxtaposition of them can be the cause of
their becoming two: nor can I understand how the division of one is
the way to make two; for then a different cause would produce the same
effect-as in the former instance the addition and juxtaposition of one
to one was the cause of two, in this the separation and subtraction of
one from the other would be the cause. Nor am I any longer satisfied
that I understand the reason why one or anything else either is
generated or destroyed or is at all, but I have in my mind some
confused notion of another method, and can never admit this.
  Then I heard someone who had a book of Anaxagoras, as he said, out
of which he read that mind was the disposer and cause of all, and I
was quite delighted at the notion of this, which appeared admirable,
and I said to myself: If mind is the disposer, mind will dispose all
for the best, and put each particular in the best place; and I
argued that if anyone desired to find out the cause of the
generation or destruction or existence of anything, he must find out
what state of being or suffering or doing was best for that thing, and
therefore a man had only to consider the best for himself and
others, and then he would also know the worse, for that the same
science comprised both. And I rejoiced to think that I had found in
Anaxagoras a teacher of the causes of existence such as I desired, and
I imagined that he would tell me first whether the earth is flat or
round; and then he would further explain the cause and the necessity
of this, and would teach me the nature of the best and show that
this was best; and if he said that the earth was in the centre, he
would explain that this position was the best, and I should be
satisfied if this were shown to me, and not want any other sort of
cause. And I thought that I would then go and ask him about the sun
and moon and stars, and that he would explain to me their
comparative swiftness, and their returnings and various states, and
how their several affections, active and passive, were all for the
best. For I could not imagine that when he spoke of mind as the
disposer of them, he would give any other account of their being as
they are, except that this was best; and I thought when he had
explained to me in detail the cause of each and the cause of all, he
would go on to explain to me what was best for each and what was
best for all. I had hopes which I would not have sold for much, and
I seized the books and read them as fast as I could in my eagerness to
know the better and the worse.
  What hopes I had formed, and how grievously was I disappointed! As I
proceeded, I found my philosopher altogether forsaking mind or any
other principle of order, but having recourse to air, and ether, and
water, and other eccentricities. I might compare him to a person who
began by maintaining generally that mind is the cause of the actions
of Socrates, but who, when he endeavored to explain the causes of my
several actions in detail, went on to show that I sit here because
my body is made up of bones and muscles; and the bones, as he would
say, are hard and have ligaments which divide them, and the muscles
are elastic, and they cover the bones, which have also a covering or
environment of flesh and skin which contains them; and as the bones
are lifted at their joints by the contraction or relaxation of the
muscles, I am able to bend my limbs, and this is why I am sitting here
in a curved posture: that is what he would say, and he would have a
similar explanation of my talking to you, which he would attribute
to sound, and air, and hearing, and he would assign ten thousand other
causes of the same sort, forgetting to mention the true cause, which
is that the Athenians have thought fit to condemn me, and
accordingly I have thought it better and more right to remain here and
undergo my sentence; for I am inclined to think that these muscles and
bones of mine would have gone off to Megara or Boeotia-by the dog of
Egypt they would, if they had been guided only by their own idea of
what was best, and if I had not chosen as the better and nobler
part, instead of playing truant and running away, to undergo any
punishment which the State inflicts. There is surely a strange
confusion of causes and conditions in all this. It may be said,
indeed, that without bones and muscles and the other parts of the body
I cannot execute my purposes. But to say that I do as I do because
of them, and that this is the way in which mind acts, and not from the
choice of the best, is a very careless and idle mode of speaking. I
wonder that they cannot distinguish the cause from the condition,
which the many, feeling about in the dark, are always mistaking and
misnaming. And thus one man makes a vortex all round and steadies
the earth by the heaven; another gives the air as a support to the
earth, which is a sort of broad trough. Any power which in disposing
them as they are disposes them for the best never enters into their
minds, nor do they imagine that there is any superhuman strength in
that; they rather expect to find another Atlas of the world who is
stronger and more everlasting and more containing than the good is,
and are clearly of opinion that the obligatory and containing power of
the good is as nothing; and yet this is the principle which I would
fain learn if anyone would teach me. But as I have failed either to
discover myself or to learn of anyone else, the nature of the best,
I will exhibit to you, if you like, what I have found to be the second
best mode of inquiring into the cause.
  I should very much like to hear that, he replied.
  Socrates proceeded: I thought that as I had failed in the
contemplation of true existence, I ought to be careful that I did
not lose the eye of my soul; as people may injure their bodily eye
by observing and gazing on the sun during an eclipse, unless they take
the precaution of only looking at the image reflected in the water, or
in some similar medium. That occurred to me, and I was afraid that
my soul might be blinded altogether if I looked at things with my eyes
or tried by the help of the senses to apprehend them. And I thought
that I had better have recourse to ideas, and seek in them the truth
of existence. I dare say that the simile is not perfect-for I am
very far from admitting that he who contemplates existence through the
medium of ideas, sees them only "through a glass darkly," any more
than he who sees them in their working and effects. However, this
was the method which I adopted: I first assumed some principle which I
judged to be the strongest, and then I affirmed as true whatever
seemed to agree with this, whether relating to the cause or to
anything else; and that which disagreed I regarded as untrue. But I
should like to explain my meaning clearly, as I do not think that
you understand me.
  No, indeed, replied Cebes, not very well.
  There is nothing new, he said, in what I am about to tell you; but
only what I have been always and everywhere repeating in the
previous discussion and on other occasions: I want to show you the
nature of that cause which has occupied my thoughts, and I shall
have to go back to those familiar words which are in the mouth of
everyone, and first of all assume that there is an absolute beauty and
goodness and greatness, and the like; grant me this, and I hope to
be able to show you the nature of the cause, and to prove the
immortality of the soul.
  Cebes said: You may proceed at once with the proof, as I readily
grant you this.
  Well, he said, then I should like to know whether you agree with
me in the next step; for I cannot help thinking that if there be
anything beautiful other than absolute beauty, that can only be
beautiful in as far as it partakes of absolute beauty-and this I
should say of everything. Do you agree in this notion of the cause?
  Yes, he said, I agree.
  He proceeded: I know nothing and can understand nothing of any other
of those wise causes which are alleged; and if a person says to me
that the bloom of color, or form, or anything else of that sort is a
source of beauty, I leave all that, which is only confusing to me, and
simply and singly, and perhaps foolishly, hold and am assured in my
own mind that nothing makes a thing beautiful but the presence and
participation of beauty in whatever way or manner obtained; for as
to the manner I am uncertain, but I stoutly contend that by beauty all
beautiful things become beautiful. That appears to me to be the only
safe answer that I can give, either to myself or to any other, and
to that I cling, in the persuasion that I shall never be overthrown,
and that I may safely answer to myself or any other that by beauty
beautiful things become beautiful. Do you not agree to that?
  Yes, I agree.
  And that by greatness only great things become great and greater
greater, and by smallness the less becomes less.
  True.
  Then if a person remarks that A is taller by a head than B, and B
less by a head than A, you would refuse to admit this, and would
stoutly contend that what you mean is only that the greater is greater
by, and by reason of, greatness, and the less is less only by, or by
reason of, smallness; and thus you would avoid the danger of saying
that the greater is greater and the less by the measure of the head,
which is the same in both, and would also avoid the monstrous
absurdity of supposing that the greater man is greater by reason of
the head, which is small. Would you not be afraid of that?
  Indeed, I should, said Cebes, laughing.
  In like manner you would be afraid to say that ten exceeded eight
by, and by reason of, two; but would say by, and by reason of, number;
or that two cubits exceed one cubit not by a half, but by
magnitude?-that is what you would say, for there is the same danger in
both cases.
  Very true, he said.
  Again, would you not be cautious of affirming that the addition of
one to one, or the division of one, is the cause of two? And you would
loudly asseverate that you know of no way in which anything comes into
existence except by participation in its own proper essence, and
consequently, as far as you know, the only cause of two is the
participation in duality; that is the way to make two, and the
participation in one is the way to make one. You would say: I will let
alone puzzles of division and addition-wiser heads than mine may
answer them; inexperienced as I am, and ready to start, as the proverb
says, at my own shadow, I cannot afford to give up the sure ground
of a principle. And if anyone assails you there, you would not mind
him, or answer him until you had seen whether the consequences which
follow agree with one another or not, and when you are further
required to give an explanation of this principle, you would go on
to assume a higher principle, and the best of the higher ones, until
you found a resting-place; but you would not refuse the principle
and the consequences in your reasoning like the Eristics-at least if
you wanted to discover real existence. Not that this confusion
signifies to them who never care or think about the matter at all, for
they have the wit to be well pleased with themselves, however great
may be the turmoil of their ideas. But you, if you are a
philosopher, will, I believe, do as I say.
  What you say is most true, said Simmias and Cebes, both speaking
at once.
  Ech. Yes, Phaedo; and I don't wonder at their assenting. Anyone
who has the least sense will acknowledge the wonderful clear. of
Socrates' reasoning.
  Phaed. Certainly, Echecrates; and that was the feeling of the
whole company at the time.
  Ech. Yes, and equally of ourselves, who were not of the company, and
are now listening to your recital. But what followed?
  Phaedo. After all this was admitted, and they had agreed about the
existence of ideas and the participation in them of the other things
which derive their names from them, Socrates, if I remember rightly,
said:-
  This is your way of speaking; and yet when you say that Simmias is
greater than Socrates and less than Phaedo, do you not predicate of
Simmias both greatness and smallness?
  Yes, I do.
  But still you allow that Simmias does not really exceed Socrates, as
the words may seem to imply, because he is Simmias, but by reason of
the size which he has; just as Simmias does not exceed Socrates
because he is Simmias, any more than because Socrates is Socrates, but
because he has smallness when compared with the greatness of Simmias?
  True.
  And if Phaedo exceeds him in size, that is not because Phaedo is
Phaedo, but because Phaedo has greatness relatively to Simmias, who is
comparatively smaller?
  That is true.
  And therefore Simmias is said to be great, and is also said to be
small, because he is in a mean between them, exceeding the smallness
of the one by his greatness, and allowing the greatness of the other
to exceed his smallness. He added, laughing, I am speaking like a
book, but I believe that what I am now saying is true.
  Simmias assented to this.
  The reason why I say this is that I want you to agree with me in
thinking, not only that absolute greatness will never be great and
also small, but that greatness in us or in the concrete will never
admit the small or admit of being exceeded: instead of this, one of
two things will happen-either the greater will fly or retire before
the opposite, which is the less, or at the advance of the less will
cease to exist; but will not, if allowing or admitting smallness, be
changed by that; even as I, having received and admitted smallness
when compared with Simmias, remain just as I was, and am the same
small person. And as the idea of greatness cannot condescend ever to
be or become small, in like manner the smallness in us cannot be or
become great; nor can any other opposite which remains the same ever
be or become its own opposite, but either passes away or perishes in
the change.
  That, replied Cebes, is quite my notion.
  One of the company, though I do not exactly remember which of
them, on hearing this, said: By Heaven, is not this the direct
contrary of what was admitted before-that out of the greater came
the less and out of the less the greater, and that opposites are
simply generated from opposites; whereas now this seems to be
utterly denied.
  Socrates inclined his head to the speaker and listened. I like
your courage, he said, in reminding us of this. But you do not observe
that there is a difference in the two cases. For then we were speaking
of opposites in the concrete, and now of the essential opposite which,
as is affirmed, neither in us nor in nature can ever be at variance
with itself: then, my friend, we were speaking of things in which
opposites are inherent and which are called after them, but now
about the opposites which are inherent in them and which give their
name to them; these essential opposites will never, as we maintain,
admit of generation into or out of one another. At the same time,
turning to Cebes, he said: Were you at all disconcerted, Cebes, at our
friend's objection?
  That was not my feeling, said Cebes; and yet I cannot deny that I am
apt to be disconcerted.
  Then we are agreed after all, said Socrates, that the opposite
will never in any case be opposed to itself?
  To that we are quite agreed, he replied.
  Yet once more let me ask you to consider the question from another
point of view, and see whether you agree with me: There is a thing
which you term heat, and another thing which you term cold?
  Certainly.
  But are they the same as fire and snow?
  Most assuredly not.
  Heat is not the same as fire, nor is cold the same as snow?
  No.
  And yet you will surely admit that when snow, as before said, is
under the influence of heat, they will not remain snow and heat; but
at the advance of the heat the snow will either retire or perish?
  Very true, he replied.
  And the fire too at the advance of the cold will either retire or
perish; and when the fire is under the influence of the cold, they
will not remain, as before, fire and cold.
  That is true, he said.
  And in some cases the name of the idea is not confined to the
idea; but anything else which, not being the idea, exists only in
the form of the idea, may also lay claim to it. I will try to make
this clearer by an example: The odd number is always called by the
name of odd?
  Very true.
  But is this the only thing which is called odd? Are there not
other things which have their own name, and yet are called odd,
because, although not the same as oddness, they are never without
oddness?-that is what I mean to ask-whether numbers such as the number
three are not of the class of odd. And there are many other
examples: would you not say, for example, that three may be called
by its proper name, and also be called odd, which is not the same with
three? and this may be said not only of three but also of five, and
every alternate number-each of them without being oddness is odd,
and in the same way two and four, and the whole series of alternate
numbers, has every number even, without being evenness. Do you admit
that?
  Yes, he said, how can I deny that?
  Then now mark the point at which I am aiming: not only do
essential opposites exclude one another, but also concrete things,
which, although not in themselves opposed, contain opposites; these, I
say, also reject the idea which is opposed to that which is
contained in them, and at the advance of that they either perish or
withdraw. There is the number three for example; will not that
endure annihilation or anything sooner than be converted into an
even number, remaining three?
  Very true, said Cebes.
  And yet, he said, the number two is certainly not opposed to the
number three?
  It is not.
  Then not only do opposite ideas repel the advance of one another,
but also there are other things which repel the approach of opposites.
  That is quite true, he said.
  Suppose, he said, that we endeavor, if possible, to determine what
these are.
  By all means.
  Are they not, Cebes, such as compel the things of which they have
possession, not only to take their own form, but also the form of some
opposite?
  What do you mean?
  I mean, as I was just now saying, and have no need to repeat to you,
that those things which are possessed by the number three must not
only be three in number, but must also be odd.
  Quite true.
  And on this oddness, of which the number three has the impress,
the opposite idea will never intrude?
  No.
  And this impress was given by the odd principle?
  Yes.
  And to the odd is opposed the even?
  True.
  Then the idea of the even number will never arrive at three?
  No.
  Then three has no part in the even?
  None.
  Then the triad or number three is uneven?
  Very true.
  To return then to my distinction of natures which are not opposites,
and yet do not admit opposites: as, in this instance, three,
although not opposed to the even, does not any the more admit of the
even, but always brings the opposite into play on the other side; or
as two does not receive the odd, or fire the cold-from these
examples (and there are many more of them) perhaps you may be able
to arrive at the general conclusion that not only opposites will not
receive opposites, but also that nothing which brings the opposite
will admit the opposite of that which it brings in that to which it is
brought. And here let me recapitulate-for there is no harm in
repetition. The number five will not admit the nature of the even, any
more than ten, which is the double of five, will admit the nature of
the odd-the double, though not strictly opposed to the odd, rejects
the odd altogether. Nor again will parts in the ratio of 3:2, nor
any fraction in which there is a half, nor again in which there is a
third, admit the notion of the whole, although they are not opposed to
the whole. You will agree to that?
  Yes, he said, I entirely agree and go along with you in that.
  And now, he said, I think that I may begin again; and to the
question which I am about to ask I will beg you to give not the old
safe answer, but another, of which I will offer you an example; and
I hope that you will find in what has been just said another
foundation which is as safe. I mean that if anyone asks you "what that
is, the inherence of which makes the body hot," you will reply not
heat (this is what I call the safe and stupid answer), but fire, a far
better answer, which we are now in a condition to give. Or if anyone
asks you "why a body is diseased," you will not say from disease,
but from fever; and instead of saying that oddness is the cause of odd
numbers, you will say that the monad is the cause of them: and so of
things in general, as I dare say that you will understand sufficiently
without my adducing any further examples.
  Yes, he said, I quite understand you.
  Tell me, then, what is that the inherence of which will render the
body alive?
  The soul, he replied.
  And is this always the case?
  Yes, he said, of course.
  Then whatever the soul possesses, to that she comes bearing life?
  Yes, certainly.
  And is there any opposite to life?
  There is, he said.
  And what is that?
  Death.
  Then the soul, as has been acknowledged, will never receive the
opposite of what she brings. And now, he said, what did we call that
principle which repels the even?
  The odd.
  And that principle which repels the musical, or the just?
  The unmusical, he said, and the unjust.
  And what do we call the principle which does not admit of death?
  The immortal, he said.
  And does the soul admit of death?
  No.
  Then the soul is immortal?
  Yes, he said.
  And may we say that this is proven?
  Yes, abundantly proven, Socrates, he replied.
  And supposing that the odd were imperishable, must not three be
imperishable?
  Of course.
  And if that which is cold were imperishable, when the warm principle
came attacking the snow, must not the snow have retired whole and
unmelted-for it could never have perished, nor could it have
remained and admitted the heat?
  True, he said.
  Again, if the uncooling or warm principle were imperishable, the
fire when assailed by cold would not have perished or have been
extinguished, but would have gone away unaffected?
  Certainly, he said.
  And the same may be said of the immortal: if the immortal is also
imperishable, the soul when attacked by death cannot perish; for the
preceding argument shows that the soul will not admit of death, or
ever be dead, any more than three or the odd number will admit of
the even, or fire or the heat in the fire, of the cold. Yet a person
may say: "But although the odd will not become even at the approach of
the even, why may not the odd perish and the even take the place of
the odd?" Now to him who makes this objection, we cannot answer that
the odd principle is imperishable; for this has not been acknowledged,
but if this had been acknowledged, there would have been no difficulty
in contending that at the approach of the even the odd principle and
the number three took up their departure; and the same argument
would have held good of fire and heat and any other thing.
  Very true.
  And the same may be said of the immortal: if the immortal is also
imperishable, then the soul will be imperishable as well as
immortal; but if not, some other proof of her imperishableness will
have to be given.
  No other proof is needed, he said; for if the immortal, being
eternal, is liable to perish, then nothing is imperishable.
  Yes, replied Socrates, all men will agree that God, and the
essential form of life, and the immortal in general, will never
perish.
  Yes, all men, he said-that is true; and what is more, gods, if I
am not mistaken, as well as men.
  Seeing then that the immortal is indestructible, must not the
soul, if she is immortal, be also imperishable?
  Most certainly.
  Then when death attacks a man, the mortal portion of him may be
supposed to die, but the immortal goes out of the way of death and
is preserved safe and sound?
  True.
  Then, Cebes, beyond question the soul is immortal and
imperishable, and our souls will truly exist in another world!
  I am convinced, Socrates, said Cebes, and have nothing more to
object; but if my friend Simmias, or anyone else, has any further
objection, he had better speak out, and not keep silence, since I do
not know how there can ever be a more fitting time to which he can
defer the discussion, if there is anything which he wants to say or
have said.
  But I have nothing more to say, replied Simmias; nor do I see any
room for uncertainty, except that which arises necessarily out of
the greatness of the subject and the feebleness of man, and which I
cannot help feeling.
  Yes, Simmias, replied Socrates, that is well said: and more than
that, first principles, even if they appear certain, should be
carefully considered; and when they are satisfactorily ascertained,
then, with a sort of hesitating confidence in human reason, you may, I
think, follow the course of the argument; and if this is clear,
there will be no need for any further inquiry.
  That, he said, is true.
  But then, O my friends, he said, if the soul is really immortal,
what care should be taken of her, not only in respect of the portion
of time which is called life, but of eternity! And the danger of
neglecting her from this point of view does indeed appear to be awful.
If death had only been the end of all, the wicked would have had a
good bargain in dying, for they would have been happily quit not
only of their body, but of their own evil together with their souls.
But now, as the soul plainly appears to be immortal, there is no
release or salvation from evil except the attainment of the highest
virtue and wisdom. For the soul when on her progress to the world
below takes nothing with her but nurture and education; which are
indeed said greatly to benefit or greatly to injure the departed, at
the very beginning of its pilgrimage in the other world.
  For after death, as they say, the genius of each individual, to whom
he belonged in life, leads him to a certain place in which the dead
are gathered together for judgment, whence they go into the world
below, following the guide who is appointed to conduct them from
this world to the other: and when they have there received their due
and remained their time, another guide brings them back again after
many revolutions of ages. Now this journey to the other world is
not, as Aeschylus says in the "Telephus," a single and straight
path-no guide would be wanted for that, and no one could miss a single
path; but there are many partings of the road, and windings, as I must
infer from the rites and sacrifices which are offered to the gods
below in places where three ways meet on earth. The wise and orderly
soul is conscious of her situation and follows in the path; but the
soul which desires the body, and which, as I was relating before,
has long been fluttering about the lifeless frame and the world of
sight, is after many struggles and many sufferings hardly and with
violence carried away by her attendant genius, and when she arrives at
the place where the other souls are gathered, if she be impure and
have done impure deeds, or been concerned in foul murders or other
crimes which are the brothers of these, and the works of brothers in
crime-from that soul everyone flees and turns away; no one will be her
companion, no one her guide, but alone she wanders in extremity of
evil until certain times are fulfilled, and when they are fulfilled,
she is borne irresistibly to her own fitting habitation; as every pure
and just soul which has passed through life in the company and under
the guidance of the gods has also her own proper home.
  Now the earth has divers wonderful regions, and is indeed in
nature and extent very unlike the notions of geographers, as I believe
on the authority of one who shall be nameless.
  What do you mean, Socrates? said Simmias. I have myself heard many
descriptions of the earth, but I do not know in what you are putting
your faith, and I should like to know.
  Well, Simmias, replied Socrates, the recital of a tale does not, I
think, require the art of Glaucus; and I know not that the art of
Glaucus could prove the truth of my tale, which I myself should
never be able to prove, and even if I could, I fear, Simmias, that
my life would come to an end before the argument was completed. I
may describe to you, however, the form and regions of the earth
according to my conception of them.
  That, said Simmias, will be enough.
  Well, then, he said, my conviction is that the earth is a round body
in the center of the heavens, and therefore has no need of air or
any similar force as a support, but is kept there and hindered from
falling or inclining any way by the equability of the surrounding
heaven and by her own equipoise. For that which, being in equipoise,
is in the center of that which is equably diffused, will not incline
any way in any degree, but will always remain in the same state and
not deviate. And this is my first notion.
  Which is surely a correct one, said Simmias.
  Also I believe that the earth is very vast, and that we who dwell in
the region extending from the river Phasis to the Pillars of Heracles,
along the borders of the sea, are just like ants or frogs about a
marsh, and inhabit a small portion only, and that many others dwell in
many like places. For I should say that in all parts of the earth
there are hollows of various forms and sizes, into which the water and
the mist and the air collect; and that the true earth is pure and in
the pure heaven, in which also are the stars-that is the heaven
which is commonly spoken of as the ether, of which this is but the
sediment collecting in the hollows of the earth. But we who live in
these hollows are deceived into the notion that we are dwelling
above on the surface of the earth; which is just as if a creature
who was at the bottom of the sea were to fancy that he was on the
surface of the water, and that the sea was the heaven through which he
saw the sun and the other stars-he having never come to the surface by
reason of his feebleness and sluggishness, and having never lifted
up his head and seen, nor ever heard from one who had seen, this
region which is so much purer and fairer than his own. Now this is
exactly our case: for we are dwelling in a hollow of the earth, and
fancy that we are on the surface; and the air we call the heaven,
and in this we imagine that the stars move. But this is also owing
to our feebleness and sluggishness, which prevent our reaching the
surface of the air: for if any man could arrive at the exterior limit,
or take the wings of a bird and fly upward, like a fish who puts his
head out and sees this world, he would see a world beyond; and, if the
nature of man could sustain the sight, he would acknowledge that
this was the place of the true heaven and the true light and the
true stars. For this earth, and the stones, and the entire region
which surrounds us, are spoilt and corroded, like the things in the
sea which are corroded by the brine; for in the sea too there is
hardly any noble or perfect growth, but clefts only, and sand, and
an endless slough of mud: and even the shore is not to be compared
to the fairer sights of this world. And greater far is the superiority
of the other. Now of that upper earth which is under the heaven, I can
tell you a charming tale, Simmias, which is well worth hearing.
  And we, Socrates, replied Simmias, shall be charmed to listen.
  The tale, my friend, he said, is as follows: In the first place, the
earth, when looked at from above, is like one of those balls which
have leather coverings in twelve pieces, and is of divers colors, of
which the colors which painters use on earth are only a sample. But
there the whole earth is made up of them, and they are brighter far
and clearer than ours; there is a purple of wonderful luster, also the
radiance of gold, and the white which is in the earth is whiter than
any chalk or snow. Of these and other colors the earth is made up, and
they are more in number and fairer than the eye of man has ever
seen; and the very hollows (of which I was speaking) filled with air
and water are seen like light flashing amid the other colors, and have
a color of their own, which gives a sort of unity to the variety of
earth. And in this fair region everything that grows-trees, and
flowers, and fruits-is in a like degree fairer than any here; and
there are hills, and stones in them in a like degree smoother, and
more transparent, and fairer in color than our highly valued
emeralds and sardonyxes and jaspers, and other gems, which are but
minute fragments of them: for there all the stones are like our
precious stones, and fairer still. The reason of this is that they are
pure, and not, like our precious stones, infected or corroded by the
corrupt briny elements which coagulate among us, and which breed
foulness and disease both in earth and stones, as well as in animals
and plants. They are the jewels of the upper earth, which also
shines with gold and silver and the like, and they are visible to
sight and large and abundant and found in every region of the earth,
and blessed is he who sees them. And upon the earth are animals and
men, some in a middle region, others dwelling about the air as we
dwell about the sea; others in islands which the air flows round, near
the continent: and in a word, the air is used by them as the water and
the sea are by us, and the ether is to them what the air is to us.
Moreover, the temperament of their seasons is such that they have no
disease, and live much longer than we do, and have sight and hearing
and smell, and all the other senses, in far greater perfection, in the
same degree that air is purer than water or the ether than air. Also
they have temples and sacred places in which the gods really dwell,
and they hear their voices and receive their answers, and are
conscious of them and hold converse with them, and they see the sun,
moon, and stars as they really are, and their other blessedness is
of a piece with this.
  Such is the nature of the whole earth, and of the things which are
around the earth; and there are divers regions in the hollows on the
face of the globe everywhere, some of them deeper and also wider
than that which we inhabit, others deeper and with a narrower
opening than ours, and some are shallower and wider; all have numerous
perforations, and passages broad and narrow in the interior of the
earth, connecting them with one another; and there flows into and
out of them, as into basins, a vast tide of water, and huge
subterranean streams of perennial rivers, and springs hot and cold,
and a great fire, and great rivers of fire, and streams of liquid mud,
thin or thick (like the rivers of mud in Sicily, and the
lava-streams which follow them), and the regions about which they
happen to flow are filled up with them. And there is a sort of swing
in the interior of the earth which moves all this up and down. Now the
swing is in this wise: There is a chasm which is the vastest of them
all, and pierces right through the whole earth; this is that which
Homer describes in the words,

   "Far off, where is the inmost depth beneath the earth";

and which he in other places, and many other poets, have called
Tartarus. And the swing is caused by the streams flowing into and
out of this chasm, and they each have the nature of the soil through
which they flow. And the reason why the streams are always flowing
in and out is that the watery element has no bed or bottom, and is
surging and swinging up and down, and the surrounding wind and air
do the same; they follow the water up and down, hither and thither,
over the earth-just as in respiring the air is always in process of
inhalation and exhalation; and the wind swinging with the water in and
out produces fearful and irresistible blasts: when the waters retire
with a rush into the lower parts of the earth, as they are called,
they flow through the earth into those regions, and fill them up as
with the alternate motion of a pump, and then when they leave those
regions and rush back hither, they again fill the hollows here, and
when these are filled, flow through subterranean channels and find
their way to their several places, forming seas, and lakes, and
rivers, and springs. Thence they again enter the earth, some of them
making a long circuit into many lands, others going to few places
and those not distant, and again fall into Tartarus, some at a point a
good deal lower than that at which they rose, and others not much
lower, but all in some degree lower than the point of issue. And
some burst forth again on the opposite side, and some on the same
side, and some wind round the earth with one or many folds, like the
coils of a serpent, and descend as far as they can, but always
return and fall into the lake. The rivers on either side can descend
only to the center and no further, for to the rivers on both sides the
opposite side is a precipice.
  Now these rivers are many, and mighty, and diverse, and there are
four principal ones, of which the greatest and outermost is that
called Oceanus, which flows round the earth in a circle; and in the
opposite direction flows Acheron, which passes under the earth through
desert places, into the Acherusian Lake: this is the lake to the
shores of which the souls of the many go when they are dead, and after
waiting an appointed time, which is to some a longer and to some a
shorter time, they are sent back again to be born as animals. The
third river rises between the two, and near the place of rising
pours into a vast region of fire, and forms a lake larger than the
Mediterranean Sea, boiling with water and mud; and proceeding muddy
and turbid, and winding about the earth, comes, among other places, to
the extremities of the Acherusian Lake, but mingles not with the
waters of the lake, and after making many coils about the earth
plunges into Tartarus at a deeper level. This is that
Pyriphlegethon, as the stream is called, which throws up jets of
fire in all sorts of places. The fourth river goes out on the opposite
side, and falls first of all into a wild and savage region, which is
all of a dark-blue color, like lapis lazuli; and this is that river
which is called the Stygian River, and falls into and forms the Lake
Styx, and after falling into the lake and receiving strange powers
in the waters, passes under the earth, winding round in the opposite
direction to Pyriphlegethon, and meeting in the Acherusian Lake from
the opposite side. And the water of this river too mingles with no
other, but flows round in a circle and falls into Tartarus over
against Pyriphlegethon, and the name of this river, as the poet
says, is Cocytus.
  Such is the name of the other world; and when the dead arrive at the
place to which the genius of each severally conveys them, first of all
they have sentence passed upon them, as they have lived well and
piously or not. And those who appear to have lived neither well nor
ill, go to the river Acheron, and mount such conveyances as they can
get, and are carried in them to the lake, and there they dwell  and
are purified of their evil deeds, and suffer the penalty of the wrongs
which they have done to others, and are absolved, and receive the
rewards of their good deeds according to their deserts. But those
who appear to be incurable by reason of the greatness of their
crimes-who have committed many and terrible deeds of sacrilege,
murders foul and violent, or the like-such are hurled into Tartarus,
which is their suitable destiny, and they never come out. Those
again who have committed crimes, which, although great, are not
unpardonable-who in a moment of anger, for example, have done violence
to a father or mother, and have repented for the remainder of their
lives, or who have taken the life of another under like extenuating
circumstances-these are plunged into Tartarus, the pains of which they
are compelled to undergo for a year, but at the end of the year the
wave casts them forth-mere homicides by way of Cocytus, parricides and
matricides by Pyriphlegethon-and they are borne to the Acherusian
Lake, and there they lift up their voices and call upon the victims
whom they have slain or wronged, to have pity on them, and to
receive them, and to let them come out of the river into the lake. And
if they prevail, then they come forth and cease from their troubles;
but if not, they are carried back again into Tartarus and from
thence into the rivers unceasingly, until they obtain mercy from those
whom they have wronged: for that is the sentence inflicted upon them
by their judges. Those also who are remarkable for having led holy
lives are released from this earthly prison, and go to their pure home
which is above, and dwell in the purer earth; and those who have
duly purified themselves with philosophy live henceforth altogether
without the body, in mansions fairer far than these, which may not
be described, and of which the time would fail me to tell.
  Wherefore, Simmias, seeing all these things, what ought not we to do
in order to obtain virtue and wisdom in this life? Fair is the
prize, and the hope great.
  I do not mean to affirm that the description which I have given of
the soul and her mansions is exactly true-a man of sense ought
hardly to say that. But I do say that, inasmuch as the soul is shown
to be immortal, he may venture to think, not improperly or unworthily,
that something of the kind is true. The venture is a glorious one, and
he ought to comfort himself with words like these, which is the reason
why lengthen out the tale. Wherefore, I say, let a man be of good
cheer about his soul, who has cast away the pleasures and ornaments of
the body as alien to him, and rather hurtful in their effects, and has
followed after the pleasures of knowledge in this life; who has
adorned the soul in her own proper jewels, which are temperance, and
justice, and courage, and nobility, and truth-in these arrayed she
is ready to go on her journey to the world below, when her time comes.
You, Simmias and Cebes, and all other men, will depart at some time or
other. Me already, as the tragic poet would say, the voice of fate
calls. Soon I must drink the poison; and I think that I had better
repair to the bath first, in order that the women may not have the
trouble of washing my body after I am dead.
  When he had done speaking, Crito said: And have you any commands for
us, Socrates-anything to say about your children, or any other
matter in which we can serve you?
  Nothing particular, he said: only, as I have always told you, I
would have you look to yourselves; that is a service which you may
always be doing to me and mine as well as to yourselves. And you
need not make professions; for if you take no thought for
yourselves, and walk not according to the precepts which I have
given you, not now for the first time, the warmth of your
professions will be of no avail.
  We will do our best, said Crito. But in what way would you have us
bury you?
  In any way that you like; only you must get hold of me, and take
care that I do not walk away from you. Then he turned to us, and added
with a smile: I cannot make Crito believe that I am the same
Socrates who have been talking and conducting the argument; he fancies
that I am the other Socrates whom he will soon see, a dead body-and he
asks, How shall he bury me? And though I have spoken many words in the
endeavor to show that when I have drunk the poison I shall leave you
and go to the joys of the blessed-these words of mine, with which I
comforted you and myself, have had, I perceive, no effect upon
Crito. And therefore I want you to be surety for me now, as he was
surety for me at the trial: but let the promise be of another sort;
for he was my surety to the judges that I would remain, but you must
be my surety to him that I shall not remain, but go away and depart;
and then he will suffer less at my death, and not be grieved when he
sees my body being burned or buried. I would not have him sorrow at my
hard lot, or say at the burial, Thus we lay out Socrates, or, Thus
we follow him to the grave or bury him; for false words are not only
evil in themselves, but they infect the soul with evil. Be of good
cheer, then, my dear Crito, and say that you are burying my body only,
and do with that as is usual, and as you think best.
  When he had spoken these words, he arose and went into the bath
chamber with Crito, who bade us wait; and we waited, talking and
thinking of the subject of discourse, and also of the greatness of our
sorrow; he was like a father of whom we were being bereaved, and we
were about to pass the rest of our lives as orphans. When he had taken
the bath his children were brought to him-(he had two young sons and
an elder one); and the women of his family also came, and he talked to
them and gave them a few directions in the presence of Crito; and he
then dismissed them and returned to us.
  Now the hour of sunset was near, for a good deal of time had
passed while he was within. When he came out, he sat down with us
again after his bath, but not much was said. Soon the jailer, who
was the servant of the Eleven, entered and stood by him, saying: To
you, Socrates, whom I know to be the noblest and gentlest and best
of all who ever came to this place, I will not impute the angry
feelings of other men, who rage and swear at me when, in obedience
to the authorities, I bid them drink the poison-indeed, I am sure that
you will not be angry with me; for others, as you are aware, and not
I, are the guilty cause. And so fare you well, and try to bear lightly
what must needs be; you know my errand. Then bursting into tears he
turned away and went out.
  Socrates looked at him and said: I return your good wishes, and will
do as you bid. Then, turning to us, he said, How charming the man
is: since I have been in prison he has always been coming to see me,
and at times he would talk to me, and was as good as could be to me,
and now see how generously he sorrows for me. But we must do as he
says, Crito; let the cup be brought, if the poison is prepared: if
not, let the attendant prepare some.
  Yet, said Crito, the sun is still upon the hilltops, and many a
one has taken the draught late, and after the announcement has been
made to him, he has eaten and drunk, and indulged in sensual delights;
do not hasten then, there is still time.
  Socrates said: Yes, Crito, and they of whom you speak are right in
doing thus, for they think that they will gain by the delay; but I
am right in not doing thus, for I do not think that I should gain
anything by drinking the poison a little later; I should be sparing
and saving a life which is already gone: I could only laugh at
myself for this. Please then to do as I say, and not to refuse me.
  Crito, when he heard this, made a sign to the servant, and the
servant went in, and remained for some time, and then returned with
the jailer carrying a cup of poison. Socrates said: You, my good
friend, who are experienced in these matters, shall give me directions
how I am to proceed. The man answered: You have only to walk about
until your legs are heavy, and then to lie down, and the poison will
act. At the same time he handed the cup to Socrates, who in the
easiest and gentlest manner, without the least fear or change of color
or feature, looking at the man with all his eyes, Echecrates, as his
manner was, took the cup and said: What do you say about making a
libation out of this cup to any god? May I, or not? The man
answered: We only prepare, Socrates, just so much as we deem enough. I
understand, he said: yet I may and must pray to the gods to prosper my
journey from this to that other world-may this, then, which is my
prayer, be granted to me. Then holding the cup to his lips, quite
readily and cheerfully he drank off the poison. And hitherto most of
us had been able to control our sorrow; but now when we saw him
drinking, and saw too that he had finished the draught, we could no
longer forbear, and in spite of myself my own tears were flowing fast;
so that I covered my face and wept over myself, for certainly I was
not weeping over him, but at the thought of my own calamity in
having lost such a companion. Nor was I the first, for Crito, when
he found himself unable to restrain his tears, had got up and moved
away, and I followed; and at that moment. Apollodorus, who had been
weeping all the time, broke out in a loud cry which made cowards of us
all. Socrates alone retained his calmness: What is this strange
outcry? he said. I sent away the women mainly in order that they might
not offend in this way, for I have heard that a man should die in
peace. Be quiet, then, and have patience.
  When we heard that, we were ashamed, and refrained our tears; and he
walked about until, as he said, his legs began to fail, and then he
lay on his back, according to the directions, and the man who gave him
the poison now and then looked at his feet and legs; and after a while
he pressed his foot hard and asked him if he could feel; and he
said, no; and then his leg, and so upwards and upwards, and showed
us that he was cold and stiff. And he felt them himself, and said:
When the poison reaches the heart, that will be the end. He was
beginning to grow cold about the groin, when he uncovered his face,
for he had covered himself up, and said (they were his last
words)-he said: Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; will you remember to
pay the debt? The debt shall be paid, said Crito; is there anything
else? There was no answer to this question; but in a minute or two a
movement was heard, and the attendants uncovered him; his eyes were
set, and Crito closed his eyes and mouth.
  Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend, whom I may truly call
the wisest, and justest, and best of all the men whom I have ever
known.


                                   -THE END-
.

                                     360 BC
                                    PHAEDRUS
                                    by Plato
                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
PHAEDRUS
  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: SOCRATES; PHAEDRUS. Scene: Under a
plane-tree, by the banks of the Ilissus.

  Socrates. My dear Phaedrus, whence come you, and whither are you
going?
  Phaedrus. I come from Lysias the son of Cephalus, and I am going
to take a walk outside the wall, for I have been sitting with him
the whole morning; and our common friend Acumenus tells me that it
is much more refreshing to walk in the open air than to be shut up
in a cloister.
  Soc. There he is right. Lysias then, I suppose, was in the town?
  Phaedr. Yes, he was staying with Epicrates, here at the house of
Morychus; that house which is near the temple of Olympian Zeus.
  Soc. And how did he entertain you? Can I be wrong in supposing
that Lysias gave you a feast of discourse?
  Phaedr. You shall hear, if you can spare time to accompany me.
  Soc. And should I not deem the conversation of you and Lysias "a
thing of higher import," as I may say in the words of Pindar, "than
any business"?
  Phaedr. Will you go on?
  Soc. And will you go on with the narration?
  Phaedr. My tale, Socrates, is one of your sort, for love was the
theme which occupied us -love after a fashion: Lysias has been writing
about a fair youth who was being tempted, but not by a lover; and this
was the point: he ingeniously proved that the non-lover should be
accepted rather than the lover.
  Soc. O that is noble of him! I wish that he would say the poor man
rather than the rich, and the old man rather than the young one;
then he would meet the case of me and of many a man; his words would
be quite refreshing, and he would be a public benefactor. For my part,
I do so long to hear his speech, that if you walk all the way to
Megara, and when you have reached the wall come back, as Herodicus
recommends, without going in, I will keep you company.
  Phaedr. What do you mean, my good Socrates? How can you imagine that
my unpractised memory can do justice to an elaborate work, which the
greatest rhetorician of the age spent a long time in composing.
Indeed, I cannot; I would give a great deal if I could.
  Soc. I believe that I know Phaedrus about as well as I know
myself, and I am very sure that the speech of Lysias was repeated to
him, not once only, but again and again;-he insisted on hearing it
many times over and Lysias was very willing to gratify him; at last,
when nothing else would do, he got hold of the book, and looked at
what he most wanted to see,-this occupied him during the whole
morning; -and then when he was tired with sitting, he went out to take
a walk, not until, by the dog, as I believe, he had simply learned
by heart the entire discourse, unless it was unusually long, and he
went to a place outside the wall that he might practise his lesson.
There he saw a certain lover of discourse who had a similar
weakness;-he saw and rejoiced; now thought he, "I shall have a partner
in my revels." And he invited him to come and walk with him. But
when the lover of discourse begged that he would repeat the tale, he
gave himself airs and said, "No I cannot," as if he were indisposed;
although, if the hearer had refused, he would sooner or later have
been compelled by him to listen whether he would or no. Therefore,
Phaedrus, bid him do at once what he will soon do whether bidden or
not.
  Phaedr. I see that you will not let me off until I speak in some
fashion or other; verily therefore my best plan is to speak as I
best can.
  Soc. A very true remark, that of yours.
  Phaedr. I will do as I say; but believe me, Socrates, I did not
learn the very words-O no; nevertheless I have a general notion of
what he said, and will give you a summary of the points in which the
lover differed from the non-lover. Let me begin at the beginning.
  Soc. Yes, my sweet one; but you must first of all show what you have
in your left hand under your cloak, for that roll, as I suspect, is
the actual discourse. Now, much as I love you, I would not have you
suppose that I am going to have your memory exercised at my expense,
if you have Lysias himself here.
  Phaedr. Enough; I see that I have no hope of practising my art
upon you. But if I am to read, where would you please to sit?
  Soc. Let us turn aside and go by the Ilissus; we will sit down at
some quiet spot.
  Phaedr. I am fortunate in not having my sandals, and as you never
have any, I think that we may go along the brook and cool our feet
in the water; this will be the easiest way, and at midday and in the
summer is far from being unpleasant.
  Soc. Lead on, and look out for a place in which we can sit down.
  Phaedr. Do you see the tallest plane-tree in the distance?
  Soc. Yes.
  Phaedr. There are shade and gentle breezes, and grass on which we
may either sit or lie down.
  Soc. Move forward.
  Phaedr. I should like to know, Socrates, whether the place is not
somewhere here at which Boreas is said to have carried off Orithyia
from the banks of the Ilissus?
  Soc. Such is the tradition.
  Phaedr. And is this the exact spot? The little stream is
delightfully clear and bright; I can fancy that there might be maidens
playing near.
  Soc. I believe that the spot is not exactly here, but about a
quarter of a mile lower down, where you cross to the temple of
Artemis, and there is, I think, some sort of an altar of Boreas at the
place.
  Phaedr. I have never noticed it; but I beseech you to tell me,
Socrates, do you believe this tale?
  Soc. The wise are doubtful, and I should not be singular if, like
them, I too doubted. I might have a rational explanation that Orithyia
was playing with Pharmacia, when a northern gust carried her over
the neighbouring rocks; and this being the manner of her death, she
was said to have been carried away by Boreas. There is a
discrepancy, however, about the locality; according to another version
of the story she was taken from Areopagus, and not from this place.
Now I quite acknowledge that these allegories are very nice, but he is
not to be envied who has to invent them; much labour and ingenuity
will be required of him; and when he has once begun, he must go on and
rehabilitate Hippocentaurs and chimeras dire. Gorgons and winged
steeds flow in apace, and numberless other inconceivable and
portentous natures. And if he is sceptical about them, and would
fain reduce them one after another to the rules of probability, this
sort of crude philosophy will take up a great deal of time. Now I have
no leisure for such enquiries; shall I tell you why? I must first know
myself, as the Delphian inscription says; to be curious about that
which is not my concern, while I am still in ignorance of my own self,
would be ridiculous. And therefore I bid farewell to all this; the
common opinion is enough for me. For, as I was saying, I want to
know not about this, but about myself: am I a monster more complicated
and swollen with passion than the serpent Typho, or a creature of a
gentler and simpler sort, to whom Nature has given a diviner and
lowlier destiny? But let me ask you, friend: have we not reached the
plane-tree to which you were conducting us?
  Phaedr. Yes, this is the tree.
  Soc. By Here, a fair resting-place, full of summer sounds and
scents. Here is this lofty and spreading plane-tree, and the agnus
cast us high and clustering, in the fullest blossom and the greatest
fragrance; and the stream which flows beneath the plane-tree is
deliciously cold to the feet. Judging from the ornaments and images,
this must be a spot sacred to Achelous and the Nymphs. How
delightful is the breeze:-so very sweet; and there is a sound in the
air shrill and summerlike which makes answer to the chorus of the
cicadae. But the greatest charm of all is the grass, like a pillow
gently sloping to the head. My dear Phaedrus, you have been an
admirable guide.
  Phaedr. What an incomprehensible being you are, Socrates: when you
are in the country, as you say, you really are like some stranger
who is led about by a guide. Do you ever cross the border? I rather
think that you never venture even outside the gates.
  Soc. Very true, my good friend; and I hope that you will excuse me
when you hear the reason, which is, that I am a lover of knowledge,
and the men who dwell in the city are my teachers, and not the trees
or the country. Though I do indeed believe that you have found a spell
with which to draw me out of the city into the country, like a
hungry cow before whom a bough or a bunch of fruit is waved. For
only hold up before me in like manner a book, and you may lead me
all round Attica, and over the wide world. And now having arrived, I
intend to lie down, and do you choose any posture in which you can
read best. Begin.
  Phaedr. Listen. You know how matters stand with me; and how, as I
conceive, this affair may be arranged for the advantage of both of us.
And I maintain that I ought not to fail in my suit, because I am not
your lover: for lovers repent of the kindnesses which they have
shown when their passion ceases, but to the non-lovers who are free
and not under any compulsion, no time of repentance ever comes; for
they confer their benefits according to the measure of their
ability, in the way which is most conducive to their own interest.
Then again, lovers consider how by reason of their love they have
neglected their own concerns and rendered service to others: and
when to these benefits conferred they add on the troubles which they
have endured, they think that they have long ago made to the beloved a
very ample return. But the non-lover has no such tormenting
recollections; he has never neglected his affairs or quarrelled with
his relations; he has no troubles to add up or excuse to invent; and
being well rid of all these evils, why should he not freely do what
will gratify the beloved?
  If you say that the lover is more to be esteemed, because his love
is thought to be greater; for he is willing to say and do what is
hateful to other men, in order to please his beloved;-that, if true,
is only a proof that he will prefer any future love to his present,
and will injure his old love at the pleasure of the new. And how, in a
matter of such infinite importance, can a man be right in trusting
himself to one who is afflicted with a malady which no experienced
person would attempt to cure, for the patient himself admits that he
is not in his right mind, and acknowledges that he is wrong in his
mind, but says that he is unable to control himself? And if he came to
his right mind, would he ever imagine that the desires were good which
he conceived when in his wrong mind? Once more, there are many more
non-lovers than lovers; and if you choose the best of the lovers,
you will not have many to choose from; but if from the non-lovers, the
choice will be larger, and you will be far more likely to find among
them a person who is worthy of your friendship. If public opinion be
your dread, and you would avoid reproach, in all probability the
lover, who is always thinking that other men are as emulous of him
as he is of them, will boast to some one of his successes, and make
a show of them openly in the pride of his heart;-he wants others to
know that his labour has not been lost; but the non-lover is more
his own master, and is desirous of solid good, and not of the
opinion of mankind. Again, the lover may be generally noted or seen
following the beloved (this is his regular occupation), and whenever
they are observed to exchange two words they are supposed to meet
about some affair of love either past or in contemplation; but when
non-lovers meet, no one asks the reason why, because people know
that talking to another is natural, whether friendship or mere
pleasure be the motive.
  Once more, if you fear the fickleness of friendship, consider that
in any other case a quarrel might be a mutual calamity; but now,
when you have given up what is most precious to you, you will be the
greater loser, and therefore, you will have more reason in being
afraid of the lover, for his vexations are many, and he is always
fancying that every one is leagued against him. Wherefore also he
debars his beloved from society; he will not have you intimate with
the wealthy, lest they should exceed him in wealth, or with men of
education, lest they should be his superiors in understanding; and
he is equally afraid of anybody's influence who has any other
advantage over himself. If he can persuade you to break with them, you
are left without friend in the world; or if, out of a regard to your
own interest, you have more sense than to comply with his desire,
you will have to quarrel with him. But those who are non-lovers, and
whose success in love is the reward of their merit, will not be
jealous of the companions of their beloved, and will rather hate those
who refuse to be his associates, thinking that their favourite is
slighted by the latter and benefited by the former; for more love than
hatred may be expected to come to him out of his friendship with
others. Many lovers too have loved the person of a youth before they
knew his character or his belongings; so that when their passion has
passed away, there is no knowing whether they will continue to be
his friends; whereas, in the case of non-lovers who were always
friends, the friendship is not lessened by the favours granted; but
the recollection of these remains with them, and is an earnest of good
things to come.
  Further, I say that you are likely to be improved by me, whereas the
lover will spoil you. For they praise your words and actions in a
wrong way; partly, because they are afraid of offending you, and also,
their judgment is weakened by passion. Such are the feats which love
exhibits; he makes things painful to the disappointed which give no
pain to others; he compels the successful lover to praise what ought
not to give him pleasure, and therefore the beloved is to be pitied
rather than envied. But if you listen to me, in the first place, I, in
my intercourse with you, shall not merely regard present enjoyment,
but also future advantage, being not mastered by love, but my own
master; nor for small causes taking violent dislikes, but even when
the cause is great, slowly laying up little wrath-unintentional
offences I shall forgive, and intentional ones I shall try to prevent;
and these are the marks of a friendship which will last.
  Do you think that a lover only can be a firm friend? reflect:-if
this were true, we should set small value on sons, or fathers, or
mothers; nor should we ever have loyal friends, for our love of them
arises not from passion, but from other associations. Further, if we
ought to shower favours on those who are the most eager suitors,-on
that principle, we ought always to do good, not to the most
virtuous, but to the most needy; for they are the persons who will
be most relieved, and will therefore be the most grateful; and when
you make a feast you should invite not your friend, but the beggar and
the empty soul; for they will love you, and attend you, and come about
your doors, and will be the best pleased, and the most grateful, and
will invoke many a blessing on your head. Yet surely you ought not
to be granting favours to those who besiege you with prayer, but to
those who are best able to reward you; nor to the lover only, but to
those who are worthy of love; nor to those who will enjoy the bloom of
your youth, but to those who will share their possessions with you
in age; nor to those who, having succeeded, will glory in their
success to others, but to those who will be modest and tell no
tales; nor to those who care about you for a moment only, but to those
who will continue your friends through life; nor to those who, when
their passion is over, will pick a quarrel with you, but rather to
those who, when the charm of youth has left you, will show their own
virtue. Remember what I have said; and consider yet this further
point: friends admonish the lover under the idea that his way of
life is bad, but no one of his kindred ever yet censured the
non-lover, or thought that he was ill-advised about his own interests.
  "Perhaps you will ask me whether I propose that you should indulge
every non-lover. To which I reply that not even the lover would advise
you to indulge all lovers, for the indiscriminate favour is less
esteemed by the rational recipient, and less easily hidden by him
who would escape the censure of the world. Now love ought to be for
the advantage of both parties, and for the injury of neither.
  "I believe that I have said enough; but if there is anything more
which you desire or which in your opinion needs to be supplied, ask
and I will answer."
  Now, Socrates, what do you think? Is not the discourse excellent,
more especially in the matter of the language?
  Soc. Yes, quite admirable; the effect on me was ravishing. And
this I owe to you, Phaedrus, for I observed you while reading to be in
an ecstasy, and thinking that you are more experienced in these
matters than I am, I followed your example, and, like you, my divine
darling, I became inspired with a phrenzy.
  Phaedr. Indeed, you are pleased to be merry.
  Soc. Do you mean that I am not in earnest?
  Phaedr. Now don't talk in that way, Socrates, but let me have your
real opinion; I adjure you, by Zeus, the god of friendship, to tell me
whether you think that any Hellene could have said more or spoken
better on the same subject.
  Soc. Well, but are you and I expected to praise the sentiments of
the author, or only the clearness, and roundness, and finish, and
tournure of the language? As to the first I willingly submit to your
better judgment, for I am not worthy to form an opinion, having only
attended to the rhetorical manner; and I was doubting whether this
could have been defended even by Lysias himself; I thought, though I
speak under correction, that he repeated himself two or three times,
either from want of words or from want of pains; and also, he appeared
to me ostentatiously to exult in showing how well he could say the
same thing in two or three ways.
  Phaedr. Nonsense, Socrates; what you call repetition was the
especial merit of the speech; for he omitted no topic of which the
subject rightly allowed, and I do not think that any one could have
spoken better or more exhaustively.
  Soc. There I cannot go along with you. Ancient sages, men and women,
who have spoken and written of these things, would rise up in judgment
against me, if out of complaisance I assented to you.
  Phaedr. Who are they, and where did you hear anything better than
this?
  Soc. I am sure that I must have heard; but at this moment I do not
remember from whom; perhaps from Sappho the fair, or Anacreon the
wise; or, possibly, from a prose writer. Why do I say so? Why, because
I perceive that my bosom is full, and that I could make another speech
as good as that of Lysias, and different. Now I am certain that this
is not an invention of my own, who am well aware that I know
nothing, and therefore I can only infer that I have been filled
through the cars, like a pitcher, from the waters of another, though I
have actually forgotten in my stupidity who was my informant.
  Phaedr. That is grand:-but never mind where you beard the
discourse or from whom; let that be a mystery not to be divulged
even at my earnest desire. Only, as you say, promise to make another
and better oration, equal in length and entirely new, on the same
subject; and I, like the nine Archons, will promise to set up a golden
image at Delphi, not only of myself, but of you, and as large as life.
  Soc. You are a dear golden ass if you suppose me to mean that Lysias
has altogether missed the mark, and that I can make a speech from
which all his arguments are to be excluded. The worst of authors
will say something which is to the point. Who, for example, could
speak on this thesis of yours without praising the discretion of the
non-lover and blaming the indiscretion of the lover? These are the
commonplaces of the subject which must come in (for what else is there
to be said?) and must be allowed and excused; the only merit is in the
arrangement of them, for there can be none in the invention; but
when you leave the commonplaces, then there may be some originality.
  Phaedr. I admit that there is reason in what you say, and I too will
be reasonable, and will allow you to start with the premiss that the
lover is more disordered in his wits than the non-lover; if in what
remains you make a longer and better speech than Lysias, and use other
arguments, then I say again, that a statue you shall have of beaten
gold, and take your place by the colossal offerings of the Cypselids
at Olympia.
  Soc. How profoundly in earnest is the lover, because to tease him
I lay a finger upon his love! And so, Phaedrus, you really imagine
that I am going to improve upon the ingenuity of Lysias?
  Phaedr. There I have you as you had me, and you must just speak
"as you best can." Do not let us exchange "tu quoque" as in a farce,
or compel me to say to you as you said to me, "I know Socrates as well
as I know myself, and he was wanting to, speak, but he gave himself
airs." Rather I would have you consider that from this place we stir
not until you have unbosomed yourself of the speech; for here are we
all alone, and I am stronger, remember, and younger than you-Wherefore
perpend, and do not compel me to use violence.
  Soc. But, my sweet Phaedrus, how ridiculous it would be of me to
compete with Lysias in an extempore speech! He is a master in his
art and I am an untaught man.
  Phaedr. You see how matters stand; and therefore let there be no
more pretences; for, indeed, I know the word that is irresistible.
  Soc. Then don't say it.
  Phaedr. Yes, but I will; and my word shall be an oath. "I say, or
rather swear"-but what god will be witness of my oath?-"By this
plane-tree I swear, that unless you repeat the discourse here in the
face of this very plane-tree, I will never tell you another; never let
you have word of another!"
  Soc. Villain I am conquered; the poor lover of discourse has no more
to say.
  Phaedr. Then why are you still at your tricks?
  Soc. I am not going to play tricks now that you have taken the oath,
for I cannot allow myself to be starved.
  Phaedr. Proceed.
  Soc. Shall I tell you what I will do?
  Phaedr. What?
  Soc. I will veil my face and gallop through the discourse as fast as
I can, for if I see you I shall feel ashamed and not know what to say.
  Phaedr. Only go on and you may do anything else which you please.
  Soc. Come, O ye Muses, melodious, as ye are called, whether you have
received this name from the character of your strains, or because
the Melians are a musical race, help, O help me in the tale which my
good friend here desires me to rehearse, in order that his friend whom
he always deemed wise may seem to him to be wiser than ever.
  Once upon a time there was a fair boy, or, more properly speaking, a
youth; he was very fair and had a great many lovers; and there was one
special cunning one, who had persuaded the youth that he did not
love him, but he really loved him all the same; and one day when he
was paying his addresses to him, he used this very argument-that he
ought to accept the non-lover rather than the lover; his words were as
follows:-
  "All good counsel begins in the same way; a man should know what
he is advising about, or his counsel will all come to nought. But
people imagine that they know about the nature of things, when they
don't know about them, and, not having come to an understanding at
first because they think that they know, they end, as might be
expected, in contradicting one another and themselves. Now you and I
must not be guilty of this fundamental error which we condemn in
others; but as our question is whether the lover or non-lover is to be
preferred, let us first of all agree in defining the nature and
power of love, and then, keeping our eyes upon the definition and to
this appealing, let us further enquire whether love brings advantage
or disadvantage.
  "Every one sees that love is a desire, and we know also that
non-lovers desire the beautiful and good. Now in what way is the lover
to be distinguished from the non-lover? Let us note that in every
one of us there are two guiding and ruling principles which lead us
whither they will; one is the natural desire of pleasure, the other is
an acquired opinion which aspires after the best; and these two are
sometimes in harmony and then again at war, and sometimes the one,
sometimes the other conquers. When opinion by the help of reason leads
us to the best, the conquering principle is called temperance; but
when desire, which is devoid of reason, rules in us and drags us to
pleasure, that power of misrule is called excess. Now excess has
many names, and many members, and many forms, and any of these forms
when very marked gives a name, neither honourable nor creditable, to
the bearer of the name. The desire of eating, for example, which
gets the better of the higher reason and the other desires, is
called gluttony, and he who is possessed by it is called a glutton-I
the tyrannical desire of drink, which inclines the possessor of the
desire to drink, has a name which is only too obvious, and there can
be as little doubt by what name any other appetite of the same
family would be called;-it will be the name of that which happens to
be eluminant. And now I think that you will perceive the drift of my
discourse; but as every spoken word is in a manner plainer than the
unspoken, I had better say further that the irrational desire which
overcomes the tendency of opinion towards right, and is led away to
the enjoyment of beauty, and especially of personal beauty, by the
desires which are her own kindred-that supreme desire, I say, which by
leading conquers and by the force of passion is reinforced, from
this very force, receiving a name, is called love."
  And now, dear Phaedrus, I shall pause for an instant to ask
whether you do not think me, as I appear to myself, inspired?
  Phaedr. Yes, Socrates, you seem to have a very unusual flow of
words.
  Soc. Listen to me, then, in silence; for surely the place is holy;
so that you must not wonder, if, as I proceed, I appear to be in a
divine fury, for already I am getting into dithyrambics.
  Phaedr. Nothing can be truer.
  Soc. The responsibility rests with you. But hear what follows, and
Perhaps the fit may be averted; all is in their hands above. I will go
on talking to my youth. Listen:
  Thus, my friend, we have declared and defined the nature of the
subject. Keeping the definition in view, let us now enquire what
advantage or disadvantage is likely to ensue from the lover or the
non-lover to him who accepts their advances.
  He who is the victim of his passions and the slave of pleasure
will of course desire to make his beloved as agreeable to himself as
possible. Now to him who has a mind discased anything is agreeable
which is not opposed to him, but that which is equal or superior is
hateful to him, and therefore the lover Will not brook any superiority
or equality on the part of his beloved; he is always employed in
reducing him to inferiority. And the ignorant is the inferior of the
wise, the coward of the brave, the slow of speech of the speaker,
the dull of the clever. These, and not these only, are the mental
defects of the beloved;-defects which, when implanted by nature, are
necessarily a delight to the lover, and when not implanted, he must
contrive to implant them in him, if he would not be deprived of his
fleeting joy. And therefore he cannot help being jealous, and will
debar his beloved from the advantages of society which would make a
man of him, and especially from that society which would have given
him wisdom, and thereby he cannot fail to do him great harm. That is
to say, in his excessive fear lest he should come to be despised in
his eyes he will be compelled to banish from him divine philosophy;
and there is no greater injury which he can inflict upon him than
this. He will contrive that his beloved shall be wholly ignorant,
and in everything shall look to him; he is to be the delight of the
lover's heart, and a curse to himself. Verily, a lover is a profitable
guardian and associate for him in all that relates to his mind.
  Let us next see how his master, whose law of life is pleasure and
not good, will keep and train the body of his servant. Will he not
choose a beloved who is delicate rather than sturdy and strong? One
brought up in shady bowers and not in the bright sun, a stranger to
manly exercises and the sweat of toil, accustomed only to a soft and
luxurious diet, instead of the hues of health having the colours of
paint and ornament, and the rest of a piece?-such a life as any one
can imagine and which I need not detail at length. But I may sum up
all that I have to say in a word, and pass on. Such a person in war,
or in any of the great crises of life, will be the anxiety of his
friends and also of his lover, and certainly not the terror of his
enemies; which nobody can deny.
  And now let us tell what advantage or disadvantage the beloved
will receive from the guardianship and society of his lover in the
matter of his property; this is the next point to be considered. The
lover will be the first to see what, indeed, will be sufficiently
evident to all men, that he desires above all things to deprive his
beloved of his dearest and best and holiest possessions, father,
mother, kindred, friends, of all whom he thinks may be hinderers or
reprovers of their most sweet converse; he will even cast a jealous
eye upon his gold and silver or other property, because these make him
a less easy prey, and when caught less manageable; hence he is of
necessity displeased at his possession of them and rejoices at their
loss; and he would like him to be wifeless, childless, homeless, as
well; and the longer the better, for the longer he is all this, the
longer he will enjoy him.
  There are some soft of animals, such as flatterers, who are
dangerous and, mischievous enough, and yet nature has mingled a
temporary pleasure and grace in their composition. You may say that
a courtesan is hurtful, and disapprove of such creatures and their
practices, and yet for the time they are very pleasant. But the
lover is not only hurtful to his love; he is also an extremely
disagreeable companion. The old proverb says that "birds of a
feather flock together"; I suppose that equality of years inclines
them to the same pleasures, and similarity begets friendship; yet
you may have more than enough even of this; and verily constraint is
always said to be grievous. Now the lover is not only unlike his
beloved, but he forces himself upon him. For he is old and his love is
young, and neither day nor night will he leave him if he can help;
necessity and the sting of desire drive him on, and allure him with
the pleasure which he receives from seeing, hearing, touching,
perceiving him in every way. And therefore he is delighted to fasten
upon him and to minister to him. But what pleasure or consolation
can the beloved be receiving all this time? Must he not feel the
extremity of disgust when he looks at an old shrivelled face and the
remainder to match, which even in a description is disagreeable, and
quite detestable when he is forced into daily contact with his
lover; moreover he is jealously watched and guarded against everything
and everybody, and has to hear misplaced and exaggerated praises of
himself, and censures equally inappropriate, which are intolerable
when the man is sober, and, besides being intolerable, are published
all over the world in all their indelicacy and wearisomeness when he
is drunk.
  And not only while his love continues is he mischievous and
unpleasant, but when his love ceases he becomes a perfidious enemy
of him on whom he showered his oaths and prayers and promises, and yet
could hardly prevail upon him to tolerate the tedium of his company
even from motives of interest. The hour of payment arrives, and now he
is the servant of another master; instead of love and infatuation,
wisdom and temperance are his bosom's lords; but the beloved has not
discovered the change which has taken place in him, when he asks for a
return and recalls to his recollection former sayings and doings; he
believes himself to be speaking to the same person, and the other, not
having the courage to confess the truth, and not knowing how to fulfil
the oaths and promises which he made when under the dominion of folly,
and having now grown wise and temperate, does not want to do as he did
or to be as he was before. And so he runs away and is constrained to
be a defaulter; the oyster-shell has fallen with the other side
uppermost-he changes pursuit into flight, while the other is compelled
to follow him with passion and imprecation not knowing that he ought
never from the first to have accepted a demented lover instead of a
sensible non-lover; and that in making such a choice he was giving
himself up to a faithless, morose, envious, disagreeable being,
hurtful to his estate, hurtful to his bodily health, and still more
hurtful to the cultivation of his mind, than which there neither is
nor ever will be anything more honoured in the eyes both of gods and
men. Consider this, fair youth, and know that in the friendship of the
lover there is no real kindness; he has an appetite and wants to
feed upon you:

    As wolves love lambs so lovers love their loves.

  But I told you so, I am speaking in verse, and therefore I had
better make an end; enough.
  Phaedr. I thought that you were only halfway and were going to
make a similar speech about all the advantages of accepting the
non-lover. Why do you not proceed?
  Soc. Does not your simplicity observe that I have got out of
dithyrambics into heroics, when only uttering a censure on the
lover? And if I am to add the praises of the non-lover, what will
become of me? Do you not perceive that I am already overtaken by the
Nymphs to whom you have mischievously exposed me? And therefore will
only add that the non-lover has all the advantages in which the
lover is accused of being deficient. And now I will say no more; there
has been enough of both of them. Leaving the tale to its fate, I
will cross the river and make the best of my way home, lest a worse
thing be inflicted upon me by you.
  Phaedr. Not yet, Socrates; not until the heat of the day has passed;
do you not see that the hour is almost noon? there is the midday sun
standing still, as people say, in the meridian. Let us rather stay and
talk over what has been said, and then return in the cool.
  Soc. Your love of discourse, Phaedrus, is superhuman, simply
marvellous, and I do not believe that there is any one of your
contemporaries who has either made or in one way or another has
compelled others to make an equal number of speeches. I would except
Simmias the Theban, but all the rest are far behind you. And now, I do
verily believe that you have been the cause of another.
  Phaedr. That is good news. But what do you mean?
  Soc. I mean to say that as I was about to cross the stream the usual
sign was given to me,-that sign which always forbids, but never
bids, me to do anything which I am going to do; and I thought that I
heard a voice saying in my car that I had been guilty of impiety, and.
that I must not go away until I had made an atonement. Now I am a
diviner, though not a very good one, but I have enough religion for my
own use, as you might say of a bad writer-his writing is good enough
for him; and I am beginning to see that I was in error. O my friend,
how prophetic is the human soul! At the time I had a sort of
misgiving, and, like Ibycus, "I was troubled; I feared that I might be
buying honour from men at the price of sinning against the gods."
Now I recognize my error.
  Phaedr. What error?
  Soc. That was a dreadful speech which you brought with you, and
you made me utter one as bad.
  Phaedr. How so?
  Soc. It was foolish, I say,-to a certain extent, impious; can
anything be more dreadful?
  Phaedr. Nothing, if the speech was really such as you describe.
  Soc. Well, and is not Eros the son of Aphrodite, and a god?
  Phaedr. So men say.
  Soc. But that was not acknowledged by Lysias in his speech, nor by
you in that other speech which you by a charm drew from my lips. For
if love be, as he surely is, a divinity, he cannot be evil. Yet this
was the error of both the speeches. There was also a simplicity
about them which was refreshing; having no truth or honesty in them,
nevertheless they pretended to be something, hoping to succeed in
deceiving the manikins of earth and gain celebrity among them.
Wherefore I must have a purgation. And I bethink me of an ancient
purgation of mythological error which was devised, not by Homer, for
he never had the wit to discover why he was blind, but by Stesichorus,
who was a philosopher and knew the reason why; and therefore, when
he lost his eyes, for that was the penalty which was inflicted upon
him for reviling the lovely Helen, he at once purged himself. And
the purgation was a recantation, which began thus,-

  False is that word of mine-the truth is that thou didst not embark
in ships, nor ever go to the walls of Troy;

and when he had completed his poem, which is called "the recantation,"
immediately his sight returned to him. Now I will be wiser than either
Stesichorus or Homer, in that I am going to make my recantation for
reviling love before I suffer; and this I will attempt, not as before,
veiled and ashamed, but with forehead bold and bare.
  Phaedr. Nothing could be more agreeable to me than to hear you say
so.
  Soc. Only think, my good Phaedrus, what an utter want of delicacy
was shown in the two discourses; I mean, in my own and in that which
you recited out of the book. Would not any one who was himself of a
noble and gentle nature, and who loved or ever had loved a nature like
his own, when we tell of the petty causes of lovers' jealousies, and
of their exceeding animosities, and of the injuries which they do to
their beloved, have imagined that our ideas of love were taken from
some haunt of sailors to which good manners were unknown-he would
certainly never have admitted the justice of our censure?
  Phaedr. I dare say not, Socrates.
  Soc. Therefore, because I blush at the thought of this person, and
also because I am afraid of Love himself, I desire to wash the brine
out of my ears with water from the spring; and I would counsel
Lysias not to delay, but to write another discourse, which shall prove
that ceteris paribus the lover ought to be accepted rather than the
non-lover.
  Phaedr. Be assured that he shall. You shall speak the praises of the
lover, and Lysias shall be compelled by me to write another
discourse on the same theme.
  Soc. You will be true to your nature in that, and therefore I
believe you.
  Phaedr. Speak, and fear not.
  Soc. But where is the fair youth whom I was addressing before, and
who ought to listen now; lest, if he hear me not, he should accept a
non-lover before he knows what he is doing?
  Phaedr. He is close at hand, and always at your service.
  Soc. Know then, fair youth, that the former discourse was the word
of Phaedrus, the son of Vain Man, who dwells in the city of Myrrhina
(Myrrhinusius). And this which I am about to utter is the
recantation of Stesichorus the son of Godly Man (Euphemus), who
comes from the town of Desire (Himera), and is to the following
effect: "I told a lie when I said" that the beloved ought to accept
the non-lover when he might have the lover, because the one is sane,
and the other mad. It might be so if madness were simply an evil;
but there is also a madness which is a divine gift, and the source
of the chiefest blessings granted to men. For prophecy is a madness,
and the prophetess at Delphi and the priestesses at Dodona when out of
their senses have conferred great benefits on Hellas, both in public
and private life, but when in their senses few or none. And I might
also tell you how the Sibyl and other inspired persons have given to
many an one many an intimation of the future which has saved them from
falling. But it would be tedious to speak of what every one knows.
  There will be more reason in appealing to the ancient inventors of
names, who would never have connected prophecy (mantike) which
foretells the future and is the noblest of arts, with madness
(manike), or called them both by the same name, if they had deemed
madness to be a disgrace or dishonour;-they must have thought that
there was an inspired madness which was a noble thing; for the two
words, mantike and manike, are really the same, and the letter t is
only a modern and tasteless insertion. And this is confirmed by the
name which was given by them to the rational investigation of
futurity, whether made by the help of birds or of other signs-this,
for as much as it is an art which supplies from the reasoning
faculty mind (nous) and information (istoria) to human thought
(oiesis) they originally termed oionoistike, but the word has been
lately altered and made sonorous by the modern introduction of the
letter Omega (oionoistike and oionistike), and in proportion
prophecy (mantike) is more perfect and august than augury, both in
name and fact, in the same proportion, as the ancients testify, is
madness superior to a sane mind (sophrosune) for the one is only of
human, but the other of divine origin. Again, where plagues and
mightiest woes have bred in certain families, owing to some ancient
blood-guiltiness, there madness has entered with holy prayers and
rites, and by inspired utterances found a way of deliverance for those
who are in need; and he who has part in this gift, and is truly
possessed and duly out of his mind, is by the use of purifications and
mysteries made whole and except from evil, future as well as
present, and has a release from the calamity which was afflicting him.
The third kind is the madness of those who are possessed by the Muses;
which taking hold of a delicate and virgin soul, and there inspiring
frenzy, awakens lyrical and all other numbers; with these adorning the
myriad actions of ancient heroes for the instruction of posterity. But
he who, having no touch of the Muses' madness in his soul, comes to
the door and thinks that he will get into the temple by the help of
art-he, I say, and his poetry are not admitted; the sane man
disappears and is nowhere when he enters into rivalry with the madman.
  I might tell of many other noble deeds which have sprung from
inspired madness. And therefore, let no one frighten or flutter us
by saying that the temperate friend is to be chosen rather than the
inspired, but let him further show that love is not sent by the gods
for any good to lover or beloved; if he can do so we will allow him to
carry off the palm. And we, on our part, will prove in answer to him
that the madness of love is the greatest of heaven's blessings, and
the proof shall be one which the wise will receive, and the witling
disbelieve. But first of all, let us view the affections and actions
of the soul divine and human, and try to ascertain the truth about
them. The beginning of our proof is as follows:-
  The soul through all her being is immortal, for that which is ever
in motion is immortal; but that which moves another and is moved by
another, in ceasing to move ceases also to live. Only the self-moving,
never leaving self, never ceases to move, and is the fountain and
beginning of motion to all that moves besides. Now, the beginning is
unbegotten, for that which is begotten has a beginning; but the
beginning is begotten of nothing, for if it were begotten of
something, then the begotten would not come from a beginning. But if
unbegotten, it must also be indestructible; for if beginning were
destroyed, there could be no beginning out of anything, nor anything
out of a beginning; and all things must have a beginning. And
therefore the self-moving is the beginning of motion; and this can
neither be destroyed nor begotten, else the whole heavens and all
creation would collapse and stand still, and never again have motion
or birth. But if the self-moving is proved to be immortal, he who
affirms that self-motion is the very idea and essence of the soul will
not be put to confusion. For the body which is moved from without is
soulless; but that which is moved from within has a soul, for such
is the nature of the soul. But if this be true, must not the soul be
the self-moving, and therefore of necessity unbegotten and immortal?
Enough of the soul's immortality.
  Of the nature of the soul, though her true form be ever a theme of
large and more than mortal discourse, let me speak briefly, and in a
figure. And let the figure be composite-a pair of winged horses and
a charioteer. Now the winged horses and the charioteers of the gods
are all of them noble and of noble descent, but those of other races
are mixed; the human charioteer drives his in a pair; and one of
them is noble and of noble breed, and the other is ignoble and of
ignoble breed; and the driving of them of necessity gives a great deal
of trouble to him. I will endeavour to explain to you in what way
the mortal differs from the immortal creature. The soul in her
totality has the care of inanimate being everywhere, and traverses the
whole heaven in divers forms appearing--when perfect and fully
winged she soars upward, and orders the whole world; whereas the
imperfect soul, losing her wings and drooping in her flight at last
settles on the solid ground-there, finding a home, she receives an
earthly frame which appears to be self-moved, but is really moved by
her power; and this composition of soul and body is called a living
and mortal creature. For immortal no such union can be reasonably
believed to be; although fancy, not having seen nor surely known the
nature of God, may imagine an immortal creature having both a body and
also a soul which are united throughout all time. Let that, however,
be as God wills, and be spoken of acceptably to him. And now let us
ask the reason why the soul loses her wings!
  The wing is the corporeal element which is most akin to the
divine, and which by nature tends to soar aloft and carry that which
gravitates downwards into the upper region, which is the habitation of
the gods. The divine is beauty, wisdom, goodness, and the like; and by
these the wing of the soul is nourished, and grows apace; but when fed
upon evil and foulness and the opposite of good, wastes and falls
away. Zeus, the mighty lord, holding the reins of a winged chariot,
leads the way in heaven, ordering all and taking care of all; and
there follows him the array of gods and demigods, marshalled in eleven
bands; Hestia alone abides at home in the house of heaven; of the rest
they who are reckoned among the princely twelve march in their
appointed order. They see many blessed sights in the inner heaven, and
there are many ways to and fro, along which the blessed gods are
passing, every one doing his own work; he may follow who will and can,
for jealousy has no place in the celestial choir. But when they go
to banquet and festival, then they move up the steep to the top of the
vault of heaven. The chariots of the gods in even poise, obeying the
rein, glide rapidly; but the others labour, for the vicious steed goes
heavily, weighing down the charioteer to the earth when his steed
has not been thoroughly trained:-and this is the hour of agony and
extremest conflict for the soul. For the immortals, when they are at
the end of their course, go forth and stand upon the outside of
heaven, and the revolution of the spheres carries them round, and they
behold the things beyond. But of the heaven which is above the
heavens, what earthly poet ever did or ever will sing worthily? It
is such as I will describe; for I must dare to speak the truth, when
truth is my theme. There abides the very being with which true
knowledge is concerned; the colourless, formless, intangible
essence, visible only to mind, the pilot of the soul. The divine
intelligence, being nurtured upon mind and pure knowledge, and the
intelligence of every soul which is capable of receiving the food
proper to it, rejoices at beholding reality, and once more gazing upon
truth, is replenished and made glad, until the revolution of the
worlds brings her round again to the same place. In the revolution she
beholds justice, and temperance, and knowledge absolute, not in the
form of generation or of relation, which men call existence, but
knowledge absolute in existence absolute; and beholding the other true
existences in like manner, and feasting upon them, she passes down
into the interior of the heavens and returns home; and there the
charioteer putting up his horses at the stall, gives them ambrosia
to eat and nectar to drink.
  Such is the life of the gods; but of other souls, that which follows
God best and is likest to him lifts the head of the charioteer into
the outer world, and is carried round in the revolution, troubled
indeed by the steeds, and with difficulty beholding true being;
while another only rises and falls, and sees, and again fails to see
by reason of the unruliness of the steeds. The rest of the souls are
also longing after the upper world and they all follow, but not
being strong enough they are carried round below the surface,
plunging, treading on one another, each striving to be first; and
there is confusion and perspiration and the extremity of effort; and
many of them are lamed or have their wings broken through the
ill-driving of the charioteers; and all of them after a fruitless
toil, not having attained to the mysteries of true being, go away, and
feed upon opinion. The reason why the souls exhibit this exceeding
eagerness to behold the plain of truth is that pasturage is found
there, which is suited to the highest part of the soul; and the wing
on which the soul soars is nourished with this. And there is a law
of Destiny, that the soul which attains any vision of truth in company
with a god is preserved from harm until the next period, and if
attaining always is always unharmed. But when she is unable to follow,
and fails to behold the truth, and through some ill-hap sinks
beneath the double load of forgetfulness and vice, and her wings
fall from her and she drops to the ground, then the law ordains that
this soul shall at her first birth pass, not into any other animal,
but only into man; and the soul which has seen most of truth shall
come to the birth as a philosopher, or artist, or some musical and
loving nature; that which has seen truth in the second degree shall be
some righteous king or warrior chief; the soul which is of the third
class shall be a politician, or economist, or trader; the fourth shall
be lover of gymnastic toils, or a physician; the fifth shall lead
the life of a prophet or hierophant; to the sixth the character of
poet or some other imitative artist will be assigned; to the seventh
the life of an artisan or husbandman; to the eighth that of a
sophist or demagogue; to the ninth that of a tyrant-all these are
states of probation, in which he who does righteously improves, and he
who does unrighteously, improves, and he who does unrighteously,
deteriorates his lot.
  Ten thousand years must elapse before the soul of each one can
return to the place from whence she came, for she cannot grow her
wings in less; only the soul of a philosopher, guileless and true,
or the soul of a lover, who is not devoid of philosophy, may acquire
wings in the third of the recurring periods of a thousand years; he is
distinguished from the ordinary good man who gains wings in three
thousand years:-and they who choose this life three times in
succession have wings given them, and go away at the end of three
thousand years. But the others receive judgment when they have
completed their first life, and after the judgment they go, some of
them to the houses of correction which are under the earth, and are
punished; others to some place in heaven whither they are lightly
borne by justice, and there they live in a manner worthy of the life
which they led here when in the form of men. And at the end of the
first thousand years the good souls and also the evil souls both
come to draw lots and choose their second life, and they may take
any which they please. The soul of a man may pass into the life of a
beast, or from the beast return again into the man. But the soul which
has never seen the truth will not pass into the human form. For a
man must have intelligence of universals, and be able to proceed
from the many particulars of sense to one conception of reason;-this
is the recollection of those things which our soul once saw while
following God-when regardless of that which we now call being she
raised her head up towards the true being. And therefore the mind of
the philosopher alone has wings; and this is just, for he is always,
according to the measure of his abilities, clinging in recollection to
those things in which God abides, and in beholding which He is what He
is. And he who employs aright these memories is ever being initiated
into perfect mysteries and alone becomes truly perfect. But, as he
forgets earthly interests and is rapt in the divine, the vulgar deem
him mad, and rebuke him; they do not see that he is inspired.
  Thus far I have been speaking of the fourth and last kind of
madness, which is imputed to him who, when he sees the beauty of
earth, is transported with the recollection of the true beauty; he
would like to fly away, but he cannot; he is like a bird fluttering
and looking upward and careless of the world below; and he is
therefore thought to be mad. And I have shown this of all inspirations
to be the noblest and highest and the offspring of the highest to
him who has or shares in it, and that he who loves the beautiful is
called a lover because he partakes of it. For, as has been already
said, every soul of man has in the way of nature beheld true being;
this was the condition of her passing into the form of man. But all
souls do not easily recall the things of the other world; they may
have seen them for a short time only, or they may have been
unfortunate in their earthly lot, and, having had their hearts
turned to unrighteousness through some corrupting influence, they
may have lost the memory of the holy things which once they saw. Few
only retain an adequate remembrance of them; and they, when they
behold here any image of that other world, are rapt in amazement;
but they are ignorant of what this rapture means, because they do
not clearly perceive. For there is no light of justice or temperance
or any of the higher ideas which are precious to souls in the
earthly copies of them: they are seen through a glass dimly; and there
are few who, going to the images, behold in them the realities, and
these only with difficulty. There was a time when with the rest of the
happy band they saw beauty shining in brightness-we philosophers
following in the train of Zeus, others in company with other gods; and
then we beheld the beatific vision and were initiated into a mystery
which may be truly called most blessed, celebrated by us in our
state of innocence, before we had any experience of evils to come,
when we were admitted to the sight of apparitions innocent and
simple and calm and happy, which we beheld shining impure light,
pure ourselves and not yet enshrined in that living tomb which we
carry about, now that we are imprisoned in the body, like an oyster in
his shell. Let me linger over the memory of scenes which have passed
away.
  But of beauty, I repeat again that we saw her there shining in
company with the celestial forms; and coming to earth we find her here
too, shining in clearness through the clearest aperture of sense.
For sight is the most piercing of our bodily senses; though not by
that is wisdom seen; her loveliness would have been transporting if
there had been a visible image of her, and the other ideas, if they
had visible counterparts, would be equally lovely. But this is the
privilege of beauty, that being the loveliest she is also the most
palpable to sight. Now he who is not newly initiated or who has become
corrupted, does not easily rise out of this world to the sight of true
beauty in the other; he looks only at her earthly namesake, and
instead of being awed at the sight of her, he is given over to
pleasure, and like a brutish beast he rushes on to enjoy and beget; he
consorts with wantonness, and is not afraid or ashamed of pursuing
pleasure in violation of nature. But he whose initiation is recent,
and who has been the spectator of many glories in the other world,
is amazed when he sees any one having a godlike face or form, which is
the expression of divine beauty; and at first a shudder runs through
him, and again the old awe steals over him; then looking upon the face
of his beloved as of a god he reverences him, and if he were not
afraid of being thought a downright madman, he would sacrifice to
his beloved as to the image of a god; then while he gazes on him there
is a sort of reaction, and the shudder passes into an unusual heat and
perspiration; for, as he receives the effluence of beauty through
the eyes, the wing moistens and he warms. And as he warms, the parts
out of which the wing grew, and which had been hitherto closed and
rigid, and had prevented the wing from shooting forth, are melted, and
as nourishment streams upon him, the lower end of the wings begins
to swell and grow from the root upwards; and the growth extends
under the whole soul-for once the whole was winged.
  During this process the whole soul is all in a state of ebullition
and effervescence,-which may be compared to the irritation and
uneasiness in the gums at the time of cutting teeth,-bubbles up, and
has a feeling of uneasiness and tickling; but when in like manner
the soul is beginning to grow wings, the beauty of the beloved meets
her eye and she receives the sensible warm motion of particles which
flow towards her, therefore called emotion (imeros), and is
refreshed and warmed by them, and then she ceases from her pain with
joy. But when she is parted from her beloved and her moisture fails,
then the orifices of the passage out of which the wing shoots dry up
and close, and intercept the germ of the wing; which, being shut up
with the emotion, throbbing as with the pulsations of an artery,
pricks the aperture which is nearest, until at length the entire
soul is pierced and maddened and pained, and at the recollection of
beauty is again delighted. And from both of them together the soul
is oppressed at the strangeness of her condition, and is in a great
strait and excitement, and in her madness can neither sleep by night
nor abide in her place by day. And wherever she thinks that she will
behold the beautiful one, thither in her desire she runs. And when she
has seen him, and bathed herself in the waters of beauty, her
constraint is loosened, and she is refreshed, and has no more pangs
and pains; and this is the sweetest of all pleasures at the time,
and is the reason why the soul of the lover will never forsake his
beautiful one, whom he esteems above all; he has forgotten mother
and brethren and companions, and he thinks nothing of the neglect
and loss of his property; the rules and proprieties of life, on
which he formerly prided himself, he now despises, and is ready to
sleep like a servant, wherever he is allowed, as near as he can to his
desired one, who is the object of his worship, and the physician who
can alone assuage the greatness of his pain. And this state, my dear
imaginary youth to whom I am talking, is by men called love, and among
the gods has a name at which you, in your simplicity, may be
inclined to mock; there are two lines in the apocryphal writings of
Homer in which the name occurs. One of them is rather outrageous,
and not altogether metrical. They are as follows:

   Mortals call him fluttering love,
   But the immortals call him winged one,
   Because the growing of wings is a necessity to him.

You may believe this, but not unless you like. At any rate the loves
of lovers and their causes are such as I have described.
  Now the lover who is taken to be the attendant of Zeus is better
able to bear the winged god, and can endure a heavier burden; but
the attendants and companions of Ares, when under the influence of
love, if they fancy that they have been at all wronged, are ready to
kill and put an end to themselves and their beloved. And he who
follows in the train of any other god, while he is unspoiled and the
impression lasts, honours and imitates him, as far as he is able;
and after the manner of his god he behaves in his intercourse with his
beloved and with the rest of the world during the first period of
his earthly existence. Every one chooses his love from the ranks of
beauty according to his character, and this he makes his god, and
fashions and adorns as a sort of image which he is to fall down and
worship. The followers of Zeus desire that their beloved should have a
soul like him; and therefore they seek out some one of a philosophical
and imperial nature, and when they have found him and loved him,
they do all they can to confirm such a nature in him, and if they have
no experience of such a disposition hitherto, they learn of any one
who can teach them, and themselves follow in the same way. And they
have the less difficulty in finding the nature of their own god in
themselves, because they have been compelled to gaze intensely on him;
their recollection clings to him, and they become possessed of him,
and receive from him their character and disposition, so far as man
can participate in God. The qualities of their god they attribute to
the beloved, wherefore they love him all the more, and if, like the
Bacchic Nymphs, they draw inspiration from Zeus, they pour out their
own fountain upon him, wanting to make him as like as possible to
their own god. But those who are the followers of Here seek a royal
love, and when they have found him they do just the same with him; and
in like manner the followers of Apollo, and of every other god walking
in the ways of their god, seek a love who is to be made like him
whom they serve, and when they have found him, they themselves imitate
their god, and persuade their love to do the same, and educate him
into the manner and nature of the god as far as they each can; for
no feelings of envy or jealousy are entertained by them towards
their beloved, but they do their utmost to create in him the
greatest likeness of themselves and of the god whom they honour.
Thus fair and blissful to the beloved is the desire of the inspired
lover, and the initiation of which I speak into the mysteries of
true love, if he be captured by the lover and their purpose is
effected. Now the beloved is taken captive in the following manner:-
  As I said at the beginning of this tale, I divided each soul into
three-two horses and a charioteer; and one of the horses was good
and the other bad: the division may remain, but I have not yet
explained in what the goodness or badness of either consists, and to
that I will proceed. The right-hand horse is upright and cleanly made;
he has a lofty neck and an aquiline nose; his colour is white, and his
eyes dark; he is a lover of honour and modesty and temperance, and the
follower of true glory; he needs no touch of the whip, but is guided
by word and admonition only. The other is a crooked lumbering
animal, put together anyhow; he has a short thick neck; he is
flat-faced and of a dark colour, with grey eyes and blood-red
complexion; the mate of insolence and pride, shag-eared and deaf,
hardly yielding to whip and spur. Now when the charioteer beholds
the vision of love, and has his whole soul warmed through sense, and
is full of the prickings and ticklings of desire, the obedient
steed, then as always under the government of shame, refrains from
leaping on the beloved; but the other, heedless of the pricks and of
the blows of the whip, plunges and runs away, giving all manner of
trouble to his companion and the charioteer, whom he forces to
approach the beloved and to remember the joys of love. They at first
indignantly oppose him and will not be urged on to do terrible and
unlawful deeds; but at last, when he persists in plaguing them, they
yield and agree to do as he bids them.
  And now they are at the spot and behold the flashing beauty of the
beloved; which when the charioteer sees, his memory is carried to
the true beauty, whom he beholds in company with Modesty like an image
placed upon a holy pedestal. He sees her, but he is afraid and falls
backwards in adoration, and by his fall is compelled to pull back
the reins with such violence as to bring both the steeds on their
haunches, the one willing and unresisting, the unruly one very
unwilling; and when they have gone back a little, the one is
overcome with shame and wonder, and his whole soul is bathed in
perspiration; the other, when the pain is over which the bridle and
the fall had given him, having with difficulty taken breath, is full
of wrath and reproaches, which he heaps upon the charioteer and his
fellow-steed, for want of courage and manhood, declaring that they
have been false to their agreement and guilty of desertion. Again they
refuse, and again he urges them on, and will scarce yield to their
prayer that he would wait until another time. When the appointed
hour comes, they make as if they had forgotten, and he reminds them,
fighting and neighing and dragging them on, until at length he, on the
same thoughts intent, forces them to draw near again. And when they
are near he stoops his head and puts up his tail, and takes the bit in
his teeth. and pulls shamelessly. Then the charioteer is. worse off
than ever; he falls back like a racer at the barrier, and with a still
more violent wrench drags the bit out of the teeth of the wild steed
and covers his abusive tongue and-jaws with blood, and forces his legs
and haunches to the ground and punishes him sorely. And when this
has happened several times and the villain has ceased from his
wanton way, he is tamed and humbled, and follows the will of the
charioteer, and when he sees the beautiful one he is ready to die of
fear. And from that time forward the soul of the lover follows the
beloved in modesty and holy fear.
  And so the beloved who, like a god, has received every true and
loyal service from his lover, not in pretence but in reality, being
also himself of a nature friendly to his admirer, if in former days he
has blushed to own his passion and turned away his lover, because
his youthful companions or others slanderously told him that he
would be disgraced, now as years advance, at the appointed age and
time, is led to receive him into communion. For fate which has
ordained that there shall be no friendship among the evil has also
ordained that there shall ever be friendship among the good. And the
beloved when he has received him into communion and intimacy, is quite
amazed at the good-will of the lover; he recognises that the
inspired friend is worth all other friends or kinsmen; they have
nothing of friendship in them worthy to be compared with his. And when
his feeling continues and he is nearer to him and embraces him, in
gymnastic exercises and at other times of meeting, then the fountain
of that stream, which Zeus when he was in love with Ganymede named
Desire, overflows upon the lover, and some enters into his soul, and
some when he is filled flows out again; and as a breeze or an echo
rebounds from the smooth rocks and returns whence it came, so does the
stream of beauty, passing through the eyes which are the windows of
the soul, come back to the beautiful one; there arriving and
quickening the passages of the wings, watering. them and inclining
them to grow, and filling the soul of the beloved also with love.
And thus he loves, but he knows not what; he does not understand and
cannot explain his own state; he appears to have caught the
infection of blindness from another; the lover is his mirror in whom
he is beholding himself, but he is not aware of this. When he is
with the lover, both cease from their pain, but when he is away then
he longs as he is longed for, and has love's image, love for love
(Anteros) lodging in his breast, which he calls and believes to be not
love but friendship only, and his desire is as the desire of the
other, but weaker; he wants to see him, touch him, kiss him, embrace
him, and probably not long afterwards his desire is accomplished. When
they meet, the wanton steed of the lover has a word to say to the
charioteer; he would like to have a little pleasure in return for many
pains, but the wanton steed of the beloved says not a word, for he
is bursting with passion which he understands not;-he throws his
arms round the lover and embraces him as his dearest friend; and, when
they are side by side, he is not in it state in which he can refuse
the lover anything, if he ask him; although his fellow-steed and the
charioteer oppose him with the arguments of shame and reason.
  After this their happiness depends upon their self-control; if the
better elements of the mind which lead to order and philosophy
prevail, then they pass their life here in happiness and
harmony-masters of themselves and orderly-enslaving the vicious and
emancipating the virtuous elements of the soul; and when the end
comes, they are light and winged for flight, having conquered in one
of the three heavenly or truly Olympian victories; nor can human
discipline or divine inspiration confer any greater blessing on man
than this. If, on the other hand, they leave philosophy and lead the
lower life of ambition, then probably, after wine or in some other
careless hour, the two wanton animals take the two souls when off
their guard and bring them together, and they accomplish that desire
of their hearts which to the many is bliss; and this having once
enjoyed they continue to enjoy, yet rarely because they have not the
approval of the whole soul. They too are dear, but not so dear to
one another as the others, either at the time of their love or
afterwards. They consider that they have given and taken from each
other the most sacred pledges, and they may not break them and fall
into enmity. At last they pass out of the body, unwinged, but eager to
soar, and thus obtain no mean reward of love and madness. For those
who have once begun the heavenward pilgrimage may not go down again to
darkness and the journey beneath the earth, but they live in light
always; happy companions in their pilgrimage, and when the time
comes at which they receive their wings they have the same plumage
because of their love.
  Thus great are the heavenly blessings which the friendship of a
lover will confer upon you, my youth. Whereas the attachment of the
non-lover, which is alloyed with a worldly prudence and has worldly
and niggardly ways of doling out benefits, will breed in your soul
those vulgar qualities which the populace applaud, will send you
bowling round the earth during a period of nine thousand years, and
leave, you a fool in the world below.
  And thus, dear Eros, I have made and paid my recantation, as well
and as fairly as I could; more especially in the matter of the
poetical figures which I was compelled to use, because Phaedrus
would have them. And now forgive the past and accept the present,
and be gracious and merciful to me, and do not in thine anger
deprive me of sight, or take from me the art of love which thou hast
given me, but grant that I may be yet more esteemed in the eyes of the
fair. And if Phaedrus or I myself said anything rude in our first
speeches, blame Lysias, who is the father of the brat, and let us have
no more of his progeny; bid him study philosophy, like his brother
Polemarchus; and then his lover Phaedrus will no longer halt between
two opinions, but will dedicate himself wholly to love and to
philosophical discourses.
  Phaedr. I join in the prayer, Socrates, and say with you, if this be
for my good, may your words come to pass. But why did you make your
second oration so much finer than the first? I wonder why. And I begin
to be afraid that I shall lose conceit of Lysias, and that he will
appear tame in comparison, even if he be willing to put another as
fine and as long as yours into the field, which I doubt. For quite
lately one of your politicians was abusing him on this very account;
and called him a "speech writer" again and again. So that a feeling of
pride may probably induce him to give up writing speeches.
  Soc. What a very amusing notion! But I think, my young man, that you
are much mistaken in your friend if you imagine that he is
frightened at a little noise; and possibly, you think that his
assailant was in earnest?
  Phaedr. I thought, Socrates, that he was. And you are aware that the
greatest and most influential statesmen are ashamed of writing
speeches and leaving them in a written form, lest they should be
called Sophists by posterity.
  Soc. You seem to be unconscious, Phaedrus, that the "sweet elbow" of
the proverb is really the long arm of the Nile. And you appear to be
equally unaware of the fact that this sweet elbow of theirs is also
a long arm. For there is nothing of which our great politicians are so
fond as of writing speeches and bequeathing them to posterity. And
they add their admirers' names at the top of the writing, out of
gratitude to them.
  Phaedr. What do you mean? I do not understand.
  Soc. Why, do you not know that when a politician writes, he begins
with the names of his approvers?
  Phaedr. How so?
  Soc. Why, he begins in this manner: "Be it enacted by the senate,
the people, or both, on the motion of a certain person," who is our
author; and so putting on a serious face, he proceeds to display his
own wisdom to his admirers in what is often a long and tedious
composition. Now what is that sort of thing but a regular piece of
authorship?
  Phaedr. True.
  Soc. And if the law is finally approved, then the author leaves
the theatre in high delight; but if the law is rejected and he is done
out of his speech-making, and not thought good enough to write, then
he and his party are in mourning.
  Phaedr. Very true.
  Soc. So far are they from despising, or rather so highly do they
value the practice of writing.
  Phaedr. No doubt.
  Soc. And when the king or orator has the power, as Lycurgus or Solon
or Darius had, of attaining an immortality or authorship in a state,
is he not thought by posterity, when they see his compositions, and
does he not think himself, while he is yet alive, to be a god?
  Phaedr. Very true.
  Soc. Then do you think that any one of this class, however
ill-disposed, would reproach Lysias with being an author?
  Phaedr. Not upon your view; for according to you he would be casting
a slur upon his own favourite pursuit.
  Soc. Any one may see that there is no disgrace in the mere fact of
writing.
  Phaedr. Certainly not.
  Soc. The disgrace begins when a man writes not well, but badly.
  Phaedr. Clearly.
  Soc. And what is well and what is badly-need we ask Lysias, or any
other poet or orator, who ever wrote or will write either a
political or any other work, in metre or out of metre, poet or prose
writer, to teach us this?
  Phaedr. Need we? For what should a man live if not for the pleasures
of discourse? Surely not for the sake of bodily pleasures, which
almost always have previous pain as a condition of them, and therefore
are rightly called slavish.
  Soc. There is time enough. And I believe that the grasshoppers
chirruping after their manner in the heat of the sun over our heads
are talking to one another and looking down at us. What would they say
if they saw that we, like the many, are not conversing, but slumbering
at mid-day, lulled by their voices, too indolent to think? Would
they not have a right to laugh at us? They might imagine that we
were slaves, who, coming to rest at a place of resort of theirs,
like sheep lie asleep at noon around the well. But if they see us
discoursing, and like Odysseus sailing past them, deaf to their
siren voices, they may perhaps, out of respect, give us of the gifts
which they receive from the gods that they may impart them to men.
  Phaedr. What gifts do you mean? I never heard of any.
  Soc. A lover of music like yourself ought surely to have heard the
story of the grasshoppers, who are said to have been human beings in
an age before the Muses. And when the Muses came and song appeared
they were ravished with delight; and singing always, never thought
of eating and drinking, until at last in their forgetfulness they
died. And now they live again in the grasshoppers; and this is the
return which the Muses make to them-they neither hunger, nor thirst,
but from the hour of their birth are always singing, and never
eating or drinking; and when they die they go and inform the Muses
in heaven who honours them on earth. They win the love of
Terpsichore for the dancers by their report of them; of Erato for
the lovers, and of the other Muses for those who do them honour,
according to the several ways of honouring them of Calliope the eldest
Muse and of Urania who is next to her, for the philosophers, of
whose music the grasshoppers make report to them; for these are the
Muses who are chiefly concerned with heaven and thought, divine as
well as human, and they have the sweetest utterance. For many reasons,
then, we ought always to talk and not to sleep at mid-day.
  Phaedr. Let us talk.
  Soc. Shall we discuss the rules of writing and speech as we were
proposing?
  Phaedr. Very good.
  Soc. In good speaking should not the mind of the speaker know the
truth of the matter about which he is going to speak?
  Phaedr. And yet, Socrates, I have heard that he who would be an
orator has nothing to do with true justice, but only with that which
is likely to be approved by the many who sit in judgment; nor with the
truly good or honourable, but only with opinion about them, and that
from opinion comes persuasion, and not from the truth.
  Soc. The words of the wise are not to be set aside; for there is
probably something in them; and therefore the meaning of this saying
is not hastily to be dismissed.
  Phaedr. Very true.
  Soc. Let us put the matter thus:-Suppose that I persuaded you to buy
a horse and go to the wars. Neither of us knew what a horse was
like, but I knew that you believed a horse to be of tame animals the
one which has the longest ears.
  Phaedr. That would be ridiculous.
  Soc. There is something more ridiculous coming:-Suppose, further,
that in sober earnest I, having persuaded you of this, went and
composed a speech in honour of an ass, whom I entitled a horse
beginning: "A noble animal and a most useful possession, especially in
war, and you may get on his back and fight, and he will carry
baggage or anything."
  Phaedr. How ridiculous!
  Soc. Ridiculous! Yes; but is not even a ridiculous friend better
than a cunning enemy?
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. And when the orator instead of putting an ass in the place of a
horse puts good for evil being himself as ignorant of their true
nature as the city on which he imposes is ignorant; and having studied
the notions of the multitude, falsely persuades them not about "the
shadow of an ass," which he confounds with a horse, but about good
which he confounds with evily-what will be the harvest which
rhetoric will be likely to gather after the sowing of that seed?
  Phaedr. The reverse of good.
  Soc. But perhaps rhetoric has been getting too roughly handled by
us, and she might answer: What amazing nonsense you are talking! As if
I forced any man to learn to speak in ignorance of the truth! Whatever
my advice may be worth, I should have told him to arrive at the
truth first, and then come to me. At the same time I boldly assert
that mere knowledge of the truth will not give you the art of
persuasion.
  Phaedr. There is reason in the lady's defence of herself.
  Soc. Quite true; if only the other arguments which remain to be
brought up bear her witness that she is an art at all. But I seem to
hear them arraying themselves on the opposite side, declaring that she
speaks falsely, and that rhetoric is a mere routine and trick, not
an art. Lo! a Spartan appears, and says that there never is nor ever
will be a real art of speaking which is divorced from the truth.
  Phaedr. And what are these arguments, Socrates? Bring them out
that we may examine them.
  Soc. Come out, fair children, and convince Phaedrus, who is the
father of similar beauties, that he will never be able to speak
about anything as he ought to speak unless he have a knowledge of
philosophy. And let Phaedrus answer you.
  Phaedr. Put the question.
  Soc. Is not rhetoric, taken generally, a universal art of enchanting
the mind by arguments; which is practised not only in courts and
public assemblies, but in private houses also, having to do with all
matters, great as well as small, good and bad alike, and is in all
equally right, and equally to be esteemed-that is what you have heard?
  Phaedr. Nay, not exactly that; I should say rather that I have heard
the art confined to speaking and writing in lawsuits, and to
speaking in public assemblies-not extended farther.
  Soc. Then I suppose that you have only heard of the rhetoric of
Nestor and Odysseus, which they composed in their leisure hours when
at Troy, and never of the rhetoric of Palamedes?
  Phaedr. No more than of Nestor and Odysseus, unless Gorgias is
your Nestor, and Thrasymachus or Theodorus your Odysseus.
  Soc. Perhaps that is my meaning. But let us leave them. And do you
tell me, instead, what are plaintiff and defendant doing in a law
court-are they not contending?
  Phaedr. Exactly so.
  Soc. About the just and unjust-that is the matter in dispute?
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. And a professor of the art will make the same thing appear to
the same persons to be at one time just, at another time, if he is
so inclined, to be unjust?
  Phaedr. Exactly.
  Soc. And when he speaks in the assembly, he will make the same
things seem good to the city at one time, and at another time the
reverse of good?
  Phaedr. That is true.
  Soc. Have we not heard of the Eleatic Palamedes (Zeno), who has an
art of speaking by which he makes the same things appear to his
hearers like and unlike, one and many, at rest and in motion?
  Phaedr. Very true.
  Soc. The art of disputation, then, is not confined to the courts and
the assembly, but is one and the same in every use of language; this
is the art, if there be such an art, which is able to find a
likeness of everything to which a likeness can be found, and draws
into the light of day the likenesses and disguises which are used by
others?
  Phaedr. How do you mean?
  Soc. Let me put the matter thus: When will there be more chance of
deception-when the difference is large or small?
  Phaedr. When the difference is small.
  Soc. And you will be less likely to be discovered in passing by
degrees into the other extreme than when you go all at once?
  Phaedr. Of course.
  Soc. He, then, who would. deceive others, and not be deceived,
must exactly know the real likenesses and differences of things?
  Phaedr. He must.
  Soc. And if he is ignorant of the true nature of any subject, how
can he detect the greater or less degree of likeness in other things
to that of which by the hypothesis he is ignorant?
  Phaedr. He cannot.
  Soc. And when men are deceived and their notions are at variance
with realities, it is clear that the error slips in through
resemblances?
  Phaedr. Yes, that is the way.
  Soc. Then he who would be a master of the art must understand the
real nature of everything; or he will never know either how to make
the gradual departure from truth into the opposite of truth which is
effected by the help of resemblances, or how to avoid it?
  Phaedr. He will not.
  Soc. He then, who being ignorant of the truth aims at appearances,
will only attain an art of rhetoric which is ridiculous and is not
an art at all?
  Phaedr. That may be expected.
  Soc. Shall I propose that we look for examples of art and want of
art, according to our notion of them, in the speech of Lysias which
you have in your hand, and in my own speech?
  Phaedr. Nothing could be better; and indeed I think that our
previous argument has been too abstract and-wanting in illustrations.
  Soc. Yes; and the two speeches happen to afford a very good
example of the way in which the speaker who knows the truth may,
without any serious purpose, steal away the hearts of his hearers.
This piece of good-fortune I attribute to the local deities; and
perhaps, the prophets of the Muses who are singing over our heads
may have imparted their inspiration to me. For I do not imagine that I
have any rhetorical art of my own.
  Phaedr. Granted; if you will only please to get on.
  Soc. Suppose that you read me the first words of Lysias' speech.
  Phaedr. "You know how matters stand with me, and how, as I conceive,
they might be arranged for our common interest; and I maintain that
I ought not to fail in my suit, because I am not your lover. For
lovers repent-"
  Soc. Enough:-Now, shall I point out the rhetorical error of those
words?
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. Every one is aware that about some things we are agreed,
whereas about other things we differ.
  Phaedr. I think that I understand you; but will you explain
yourself?
  Soc. When any one speaks of iron and silver, is not the same thing
present in the minds of all?
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. But when any one speaks of justice and goodness we part company
and are at odds with one another and with ourselves?
  Phaedr. Precisely.
  Soc. Then in some things we agree, but not in others?
  Phaedr. That is true.
  Soc. In which are we more likely to be deceived, and in which has
rhetoric the greater power?
  Phaedr. Clearly, in the uncertain class.
  Soc. Then the rhetorician ought to make a regular division, and
acquire a distinct notion of both classes, as well of that in which
the many err, as of that in which they do not err?
  Phaedr. He who made such a distinction would have an excellent
principle.
  Soc. Yes; and in the next place he must have a keen eye for the
observation of particulars in speaking, and not make a mistake about
the class to which they are to be referred.
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. Now to which class does love belong-to the debatable or to
the undisputed class?
  Phaedr. To the debatable, clearly; for if not, do you think that
love would have allowed you to say as you did, that he is an evil both
to the lover and the beloved, and also the greatest possible good?
  Soc. Capital. But will you tell me whether I defined love at the
beginning of my speech? for, having been in an ecstasy, I cannot
well remember.
  Phaedr. Yes, indeed; that you did, and no mistake.
  Soc. Then I perceive that the Nymphs of Achelous and Pan the son
of Hermes, who inspired me, were far better rhetoricians than Lysias
the son of Cephalus. Alas! how inferior to them he is! But perhaps I
am mistaken; and Lysias at the commencement of his lover's speech
did insist on our supposing love to be something or other which he
fancied him to be, and according to this model he fashioned and framed
the remainder of his discourse. Suppose we read his beginning over
again:
  Phaedr. If you please; but you will not find what you want.
  Soc, Read, that I may have his exact words.
  Phaedr. "You know how matters stand with and how, as I conceive,
they might be arranged for our common interest; and I maintain I ought
not to fail in my suit because I am not your lover, for lovers
repent of the kindnesses which they have shown, when their love is
over."
  Soc. Here he appears to have done just the reverse of what he ought;
for he has begun at the end, and is swimming on his back through the
flood to the place of starting. His address to the fair youth begins
where the lover would have ended. Am I not right, sweet Phaedrus?
  Phaedr. Yes, indeed, Socrates; he does begin at the end.
  Soc. Then as to the other topics-are they not thrown down anyhow? Is
there any principle in them? Why should the next topic follow next
in order, or any other topic? I cannot help fancying in my ignorance
that he wrote off boldly just what came into his head, but I dare
say that you would recognize a rhetorical necessity in the
succession of the several parts of the composition?
  Phaedr. You have too good an opinion of me if you think that I
have any such insight into his principles of composition.
  Soc. At any rate, you will allow that every discourse ought to be
a living creature, having a body of its own and a head and feet; there
should be a middle, beginning, and end, adapted to one another and
to the whole?
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. Can this be said of the discourse of Lysias? See whether you
can find any more connexion in his words than in the epitaph which
is said by some to have been inscribed on the grave of Midas the
Phrygian.
  Phaedr. What is there remarkable in the epitaph?
  Soc. It is as follows:-

   I am a maiden of bronze and lie on the tomb of Midas;
   So long as water flows and tall trees grow,
   So long here on this spot by his sad tomb abiding,
   I shall declare to passers-by that Midas sleeps below.

Now in this rhyme whether a line comes first or comes last, as you
will perceive, makes no difference.
  Phaedr. You are making fun of that oration of ours.
  Soc. Well, I will say no more about your friend's speech lest I
should give offence to you; although I think that it might furnish
many other examples of what a man ought rather to avoid. But I will
proceed to the other speech, which, as I think, is also suggestive
to students of rhetoric.
  Phaedr. In what way?
  Soc. The two speeches, as you may remember, were unlike-I the one
argued that the lover and the other that the non-lover ought to be
accepted.
  Phaedr. And right manfully.
  Soc. You should rather say "madly"; and madness was the argument
of them, for, as I said, "love is a madness."
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. And of madness there were two kinds; one produced by human
infirmity, the other was a divine release of the soul from the yoke of
custom and convention.
  Phaedr. True.
  Soc. The divine madness was subdivided into four kinds, prophetic,
initiatory, poetic, erotic, having four gods presiding over them;
the first was the inspiration of Apollo, the second that of
Dionysus, the third that of the Muses, the fourth that of Aphrodite
and Eros. In the description of the last kind of madness, which was
also said to be the best, we spoke of the affection of love in a
figure, into which we introduced a tolerably credible and possibly
true though partly erring myth, which was also a hymn in honour of
Love, who is your lord and also mine, Phaedrus, and the guardian of
fair children, and to him we sung the hymn in measured and solemn
strain.
  Phaedr. I know that I had great pleasure in listening to you.
  Soc. Let us take this instance and note how the transition was
made from blame to praise.
  Phaedr. What do you mean?
  Soc. I mean to say that the composition was mostly playful. Yet in
these chance fancies of the hour were involved two principles of which
we should be too glad to have a clearer description if art could
give us one.
  Phaedr. What are they?
  Soc. First, the comprehension of scattered particulars in one
idea; as in our definition of love, which whether true or false
certainly gave clearness and consistency to the discourse, the speaker
should define his several notions and so make his meaning clear.
  Phaedr. What is the other principle, Socrates?
  Soc. The second principle is that of division into species according
to the natural formation, where the joint is, not breaking any part as
a bad carver might. Just as our two discourses, alike assumed, first
of all, a single form of unreason; and then, as the body which from
being one becomes double and may be divided into a left side and right
side, each having parts right and left of the same name-after this
manner the speaker proceeded to divide the parts of the left side
and did not desist until he found in them an evil or left-handed
love which he justly reviled; and the other discourse leading us to
the madness which lay on the right side, found another love, also
having the same name, but divine, which the speaker held up before
us and applauded and affirmed to be the author of the greatest
benefits.
  Phaedr. Most true.
  Soc. I am myself a great lover of these processes of division and
generalization; they help me to speak and to think. And if I find
any man who is able to see "a One and Many" in nature, him I follow,
and "walk in his footsteps as if he were a god." And those who have
this art, I have hitherto been in the habit of calling
dialecticians; but God knows whether the name is right or not. And I
should like to know what name you would give to your or to Lysias'
disciples, and whether this may not be that famous art of rhetoric
which Thrasymachus and others teach and practise? Skilful speakers
they are, and impart their skill to any who is willing to make kings
of them and to bring gifts to them.
  Phaedr. Yes, they are royal men; but their art is not the same
with the art of those whom you call, and rightly, in my opinion,
dialecticians:-Still we are in the dark about rhetoric.
  Soc. What do you mean? The remains of it, if there be anything
remaining which can be brought under rules of art, must be a fine
thing; and, at any rate, is not to be despised by you and me. But
how much is left?
  Phaedr. There is a great deal surely to be found in books of
rhetoric?
  Soc. Yes; thank you for reminding me:-There is the exordium, showing
how the speech should begin, if I remember rightly; that is what you
mean-the niceties of the art?
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. Then follows the statement of facts, and upon that witnesses;
thirdly, proofs; fourthly, probabilities are to come; the great
Byzantian word-maker also speaks, if I am not mistaken, of
confirmation and further confirmation.
  Phaedr. You mean the excellent Theodorus.
  Soc. Yes; and he tells how refutation or further refutation is to be
managed, whether in accusation or defence. I ought also to mention the
illustrious Parian, Evenus, who first invented insinuations and
indirect praises; and also indirect censures, which according to
some he put into verse to help the memory. But shall I "to dumb
forgetfulness consign" Tisias and Gorgias, who are not ignorant that
probability is superior to truth, and who by: force of argument make
the little appear great and the great little, disguise the new in
old fashions and the old in new fashions, and have discovered forms
for everything, either short or going on to infinity. I remember
Prodicus laughing when I told him of this; he said that he had himself
discovered the true rule of art, which was to be neither long nor
short, but of a convenient length.
  Phaedr. Well done, Prodicus!
  Soc. Then there is Hippias the Elean stranger, who probably agrees
with him.
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. And there is also Polus, who has treasuries of diplasiology,
and gnomology, and eikonology, and who teaches in them the names of
which Licymnius made him a present; they were to give a polish.
  Phaedr. Had not Protagoras something of the same sort?
  Soc. Yes, rules of correct diction and many other fine precepts; for
the "sorrows of a poor old man," or any other pathetic case, no one is
better than the Chalcedonian giant; he can put a whole company of
people into a passion and out of one again by his mighty magic, and is
first-rate at inventing or disposing of any sort of calumny on any
grounds or none. All of them agree in asserting that a speech should
end in a recapitulation, though they do not all agree to use the
same word.
  Phaedr. You mean that there should be a summing up of the
arguments in order to remind the hearers of them.
  Soc. I have now said all that I have to say of the art of
rhetoric: have you anything to add?
  Phaedr. Not much; nothing very important.
  Soc. Leave the unimportant and let us bring the really important
question into the light of day, which is: What power has this art of
rhetoric, and when?
  Phaedr. A very great power in public meetings.
  Soc. It has. But I should like to know whether you have the same
feeling as I have about the rhetoricians? To me there seem to be a
great many holes in their web.
  Phaedr. Give an example.
  Soc. I will. Suppose a person to come to your friend Eryximachus, or
to his father Acumenus, and to say to him: "I know how to apply
drugs which shall have either a heating or a cooling effect, and I can
give a vomit and also a purge, and all that sort of thing; and knowing
all this, as I do, I claim to be a physician and to make physicians by
imparting this knowledge to others,"-what do you suppose that they
would say?
  Phaedr. They would be sure to ask him whether he knew "to whom" he
would give his medicines, and "when," and "how much."
  Soc. And suppose that he were to reply: "No; I know nothing of all
that; I expect the patient who consults me to be able to do these
things for himself"?
  Phaedr. They would say in reply that he is a madman or pedant who
fancies that he is a physician because he has read something in a
book, or has stumbled on a prescription or two, although he has no
real understanding of the art of medicine.
  Soc. And suppose a person were to come to Sophocles or Euripides and
say that he knows how to make a very long speech about a small matter,
and a short speech about a great matter, and also a sorrowful
speech, or a terrible, or threatening speech, or any other kind of
speech, and in teaching this fancies that he is teaching the art of
tragedy-?
  Phaedr. They too would surely laugh at him if he fancies that
tragedy is anything but the arranging of these elements in a manner
which will be suitable to one another and to the whole.
  Soc. But I do not suppose that they would be rude or abusive to him:
Would they not treat him as a musician would a man who thinks that
he is a harmonist because he knows how to pitch the highest and lowest
notes; happening to meet such an one he would not say to him savagely,
"Fool, you are mad!" But like a musician, in a gentle and harmonious
tone of voice, he would answer: "My good friend, he who would be a
harmonist must certainly know this, and yet he may understand
nothing of harmony if he has not got beyond your stage of knowledge,
for you only know the preliminaries of harmony and not harmony
itself."
  Phaedr. Very true.
  Soc. And will not Sophocles say to the display of the would-be
tragedian, that this is not tragedy but the preliminaries of
tragedy? and will not Acumenus say the same of medicine to the
would-be physician?
  Phaedr. Quite true.
  Soc. And if Adrastus the mellifluous or Pericles heard of these
wonderful arts, brachylogies and eikonologies and all the hard names
which we have been endeavouring to draw into the light of day, what
would they say? Instead of losing temper and applying
uncomplimentary epithets, as you and I have been doing, to the authors
of such an imaginary art, their superior wisdom would rather censure
us, as well as them. "Have a little patience, Phaedrus and Socrates,
they would say; you should not be in such a passion with those who
from some want of dialectical skill are unable to define the nature of
rhetoric, and consequently suppose that they have found the art in the
preliminary conditions of it, and when these have been taught by
them to others, fancy that the whole art of rhetoric has been taught
by them; but as to using the several instruments of the art
effectively, or making the composition a whole,-an application of it
such as this is they regard as an easy thing which their disciples may
make for themselves."
  Phaedr. I quite admit, Socrates, that the art of rhetoric which
these men teach and of which they write is such as you
describe-there I agree with you. But I still want to know where and
how the true art of rhetoric and persuasion is to be acquired.
  Soc. The perfection which is required of the finished orator is,
or rather must be, like the perfection of anything else; partly
given by nature, but may also be assisted by art. If you have the
natural power and add to it knowledge and practice, you will be a
distinguished speaker; if you fall short in either of these, you
will be to that extent defective. But the art, as far as there is an
art, of rhetoric does not lie in the direction of Lysias or
Thrasymachus.
  Phaedr. In what direction then?
  Soc. I conceive Pericles to have been the most accomplished of
rhetoricians.
  Phaedr. What of that?
  Soc. All the great arts require discussion and high speculation
about the truths of nature; hence come loftiness of thought and
completeness of execution. And this, as I conceive, was the quality
which, in addition to his natural gifts, Pericles acquired from his
intercourse with Anaxagoras whom he happened to know. He was thus
imbued with the higher philosophy, and attained the knowledge of
Mind and the negative of Mind, which were favourite themes of
Anaxagoras, and applied what suited his purpose to the art of
speaking.
  Phaedr. Explain.
  Soc. Rhetoric is like medicine.
  Phaedr. How so?
  Soc. Why, because medicine has to define the nature of the body
and rhetoric of the soul-if we would proceed, not empirically but
scientifically, in the one case to impart health and strength by
giving medicine and food in the other to implant the conviction or
virtue which you desire, by the right application of words and
training.
  Phaedr. There, Socrates, I suspect that you are right.
  Soc. And do you think that you can know the nature of the soul
intelligently without knowing the nature of the whole?
  Phaedr. Hippocrates the Asclepiad says that the nature even of the
body can only be understood as a whole.
  Soc. Yes, friend, and he was right:-still, we ought not to be
content with the name of Hippocrates, but to examine and see whether
his argument agrees with his conception of nature.
  Phaedr. I agree.
  Soc. Then consider what truth as well as Hippocrates says about this
or about any other nature. Ought we not to consider first whether that
which we wish to learn and to teach is a simple or multiform thing,
and if simple, then to enquire what power it has of acting or being
acted upon in relation to other things, and if multiform, then to
number the forms; and see first in the case of one of them, and then
in. case of all of them, what is that power of acting or being acted
upon which makes each and all of them to be what they are?
  Phaedr. You may very likely be right, Socrates.
  Soc. The method which proceeds without analysis is like the
groping of a blind man. Yet, surely, he who is an artist ought not
to admit of a comparison with the blind, or deaf. The rhetorician, who
teaches his pupil to speak scientifically, will particularly set forth
the nature of that being to which he addresses his speeches; and this,
I conceive, to be the soul.
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. His whole effort is directed to the soul; for in that he
seeks to produce conviction.
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. Then clearly, Thrasymachus or any one else who teaches rhetoric
in earnest will give an exact description of the nature of the soul;
which will enable us to see whether she be single and same, or, like
the body, multiform. That is what we should call showing the nature of
the soul.
  Phaedr. Exactly.
  Soc. He will explain, secondly, the mode in which she acts or is
acted upon.
  Phaedr. True.
  Soc. Thirdly, having classified men and speeches, and their kinds
and affections, and adapted them to one another, he will tell the
reasons of his arrangement, and show why one soul is persuaded by a
particular form of argument, and another not.
  Phaedr. You have hit upon a very good way.
  Soc. Yes, that is the true and only way in which any subject can
be set forth or treated by rules of art, whether in speaking or
writing. But the writers of the present day, at whose feet you have
sat, craftily, conceal the nature of the soul which they know quite
well. Nor, until they adopt our method of reading and writing, can
we admit that they write by rules of art?
  Phaedr. What is our method?
  Soc. I cannot give you the exact details; but I should like to
tell you generally, as far as is in my power, how a man ought to
proceed according to rules of art.
  Phaedr. Let me hear.
  Soc. Oratory is the art of enchanting the soul, and therefore he who
would be an orator has to learn the differences of human souls-they
are so many and of such a nature, and from them come the differences
between man and man. Having proceeded thus far in his analysis, he
will next divide speeches into their different classes:-"Such and such
persons," he will say, are affected by this or that kind of speech
in this or that way," and he will tell you why. The pupil must have
a good theoretical notion of them first, and then he must have
experience of them in actual life, and be able to follow them with all
his senses about him, or he will never get beyond the precepts of
his masters. But when he understands what persons are persuaded by
what arguments, and sees the person about whom he was speaking in
the abstract actually before him, and knows that it is he, and can say
to himself, "This is the man or this is the character who ought to
have a certain argument applied to him in order to convince him of a
certain opinion"; -he who knows all this, and knows also when he
should speak and when he should refrain, and when he should use
pithy sayings, pathetic appeals, sensational effects, and all the
other modes of speech which he has learned;-when, I say, he knows
the times and seasons of all these things, then, and not till then, he
is a perfect master of his art; but if he fail in any of these points,
whether in speaking or teaching or writing them, and yet declares that
he speaks by rules of art, he who says "I don't believe you" has the
better of him. Well, the teacher will say, is this, and Socrates, your
account of the so-called art of rhetoric, or am I to look for another?
  Phaedr. He must take this, Socrates for there is no possibility of
another, and yet the creation of such an art is not easy.
  Soc. Very true; and therefore let us consider this matter in every
light, and see whether we cannot find a shorter and easier road; there
is no use in taking a long rough round-about way if there be a shorter
and easier one. And I wish that you would try and remember whether you
have heard from Lysias or any one else anything which might be of
service to us.
  Phaedr. If trying would avail, then I might; but at the moment I can
think of nothing.
  Soc. Suppose I tell you something which somebody who knows told me.
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. May not "the wolf," as the proverb says, claim a hearing"?
  Phaedr. Do you say what can be said for him.
  Soc. He will argue that is no use in putting a solemn face on
these matters, or in going round and round, until you arrive at
first principles; for, as I said at first, when the question is of
justice and good, or is a question in which men are concerned who
are just and good, either by nature or habit, he who would be a
skilful rhetorician has; no need of truth-for that in courts of law
men literally care nothing about truth, but only about conviction: and
this is based on probability, to which who would be a skilful orator
should therefore give his whole attention. And they say also that
there are cases in which the actual facts, if they are improbable,
ought to be withheld, and only the probabilities should be told either
in accusation or defence, and that always in speaking, the orator
should keep probability in view, and say good-bye to the truth. And
the observance, of this principle throughout a speech furnishes the
whole art.
  Phaedr. That is what the professors of rhetoric do actually say,
Socrates. I have not forgotten that we have quite briefly touched upon
this matter already; with them the point is all-important.
  Soc. I dare say that you are familiar with Tisias. Does he not
define probability to be that which the many think?
  Phaedr. Certainly, he does.
  Soc. I believe that he has a clever and ingenious case of this
sort:-He supposes a feeble and valiant man to have assaulted a
strong and cowardly one, and to have robbed him of his coat or of
something or other; he is brought into court, and then Tisias says
that both parties should tell lies: the coward should say that he
was assaulted by more men than one; the other should prove that they
were alone, and should argue thus: "How could a weak man like me
have assaulted a strong man like him?" The complainant will not like
to confess his own cowardice, and will therefore invent some other lie
which his adversary will thus gain an opportunity of refuting. And
there are other devices of the same kind which have a place in the
system. Am I not right, Phaedrus?
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. Bless me, what a wonderfully mysterious art is this which
Tisias or some other gentleman, in whatever name or country he
rejoices, has discovered. Shall we say a word to him or not?
  Phaedr. What shall we say to him?
  Soc. Let us tell him that, before he appeared, you and I were saying
that the probability of which he speaks was engendered in the minds of
the many by the likeness of the truth, and we had just been
affirming that he who knew the truth would always know best how to
discover the resemblances of the truth. If he has anything else to say
about the art of speaking we should like to hear him; but if not, we
are satisfied with our own view, that unless a man estimates the
various characters of his heaters and is able to divide all things
into classes and to comprehend them under single ideas he will never
be a skilful rhetorician even within the limits of human power. And
this skill he will not attain without a great deal of trouble, which a
good man ought to undergo, not for the sake of speaking and acting
before men, but in order that he may be able to say what is acceptable
to God and always to act acceptably to Him as far as in him lies;
for there is a saying of wiser men than ourselves, that a man of sense
should not try to please his fellow-servants (at least this should not
be his first object) but his good and noble masters; and therefore
if the way is long and circuitous, marvel not at this, for, where
the end is great, there we may take the longer road, but not for
lesser ends such as yours. Truly, the argument may say, Tisias, that
if you do not mind going so far, rhetoric has a fair beginning here.
  Phaedr. I think, Socrates, that this is admirable, if only
practicable.
  Soc. But even to fail in an honourable object is honourable.
  Phaedr. True.
  Soc. Enough appears to have been said by us of a true and false
art of speaking.
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. But there is something yet to be said of propriety and
impropriety of writing.
  Phaedr. Yes.
  Soc. Do you know how you can speak or act about rhetoric in a manner
which will be acceptable to God?
  Phaedr. No, indeed. Do you?
  Soc. I have heard a tradition of the ancients, whether true or not
they only know; although if we had found the truth ourselves, do you
think that we should care much about the opinions of men?
  Phaedr. Your question needs no answer; but I wish that you would
tell me what you say that you have heard.
  Soc. At the Egyptian city of Naucratis, there was a famous old
god, whose name was Theuth; the bird which is called the Ibis is
sacred to him, and he was the inventor of many arts, such as
arithmetic and calculation and geometry and astronomy and draughts and
dice, but his great discovery was the use of letters. Now in those
days the god Thamus was the king of the whole country of Egypt; and he
dwelt in that great city of Upper Egypt which the Hellenes call
Egyptian Thebes, and the god himself is called by them Ammon. To
came Theuth and showed his inventions, desiring that the other
Egyptians might be allowed to have the benefit of the he enumerated
them, and Thamus enquired about their several uses, and praised some
of them and censured others, as he approved or disapproved of them. It
would take a long time to repeat all that Thamus said to Theuth in
praise or blame of the various arts. But when they came to letters,
This, said Theuth, will make the Egyptians wiser and give them
better memories; it is a specific both for the memory and for the wit.
Thamus replied: O most ingenious Theuth, the parent or inventor of
an art is not always the best judge of the utility or inutility of his
own inventions to the users of them. And in this instance, you who are
the father of letters, from a paternal love of your own children
have been led to attribute to them a quality which they cannot have;
for this discovery of yours will create forgetfulness in the learners'
souls, because they will not use their memories; they will trust to
the external written characters and not remember of themselves. The
specific which you have discovered is an aid not to memory, but to
reminiscence, and you give your disciples not truth, but only the
semblance of truth; they will be hearers of many things and will
have learned nothing; they will appear to be omniscient and will
generally know nothing; they will be tiresome company, having the show
of wisdom without the reality.
  Phaedr. Yes, Socrates, you can easily invent tales of Egypt, or of
any other country.
  Soc. There was a tradition in the temple of Dodona that oaks first
gave prophetic utterances. The men of old, unlike in their
simplicity to young philosophy, deemed that if they heard the truth
even from "oak or rock," it was enough for them; whereas you seem to
consider not whether a thing is or is not true, but who the speaker is
and from what country the tale comes.
  Phaedr. I acknowledge the justice of your rebuke; and I think that
the Theban is right in his view about letters.
  Soc. He would be a very simple person, and quite a stranger to the
oracles of Thamus or Ammon, who should leave in writing or receive
in writing any art under the idea that the written word would be
intelligible or certain; or who deemed that writing was at all
better than knowledge and recollection of the same matters?
  Phaedr. That is most true.
  Soc. I cannot help feeling, Phaedrus, that writing is
unfortunately like painting; for the creations of the painter have the
attitude of life, and yet if you ask them a question they preserve a
solemn silence. And the same may be said of speeches. You would
imagine that they had intelligence, but if you want to know anything
and put a question to one of them, the speaker always gives one
unvarying answer. And when they have been once written down they are
tumbled about anywhere among those who may or may not understand them,
and know not to whom they should reply, to whom not: and, if they
are maltreated or abused, they have no parent to protect them; and
they cannot protect or defend themselves.
  Phaedr. That again is most true.
  Soc. Is there not another kind of word or speech far better than
this, and having far greater power-a son of the same family, but
lawfully begotten?
  Phaedr. Whom do you mean, and what is his origin?
  Soc. I mean an intelligent word graven in the soul of the learner,
which can defend itself, and knows when to speak and when to be
silent.
  Phaedr. You mean the living word of knowledge which has a soul,
and of which written word is properly no more than an image?
  Soc. Yes, of course that is what I mean. And now may I be allowed to
ask you a question: Would a husbandman, who is a man of sense, take
the seeds, which he values and which he wishes to bear fruit, and in
sober seriousness plant them during the heat of summer, in some garden
of Adonis, that he may rejoice when he sees them in eight days
appearing in beauty? at least he would do so, if at all, only for
the sake of amusement and pastime. But when he is in earnest he sows
in fitting soil, and practises husbandry, and is satisfied if in eight
months the seeds which he has sown arrive at perfection?
  Phaedr. Yes, Socrates, that will be his way when he is in earnest;
he will do the other, as you say, only in play.
  Soc. And can we suppose that he who knows the just and good and
honourable has less understanding, than the husbandman, about his
own seeds?
  Phaedr. Certainly not.
  Soc. Then he will not seriously incline to "write" his thoughts
"in water" with pen and ink, sowing words which can neither speak
for themselves nor teach the truth adequately to others?
  Phaedr. No, that is not likely.
  Soc. No, that is not likely-in the garden of letters he will sow and
plant, but only for the sake of recreation and amusement; he will
write them down as memorials to be treasured against the forgetfulness
of old age, by himself, or by any other old man who is treading the
same path. He will rejoice in beholding their tender growth; and while
others are refreshing their souls with banqueting and the like, this
will be the pastime in which his days are spent.
  Phaedr. A pastime, Socrates, as noble as the other is ignoble, the
pastime of a man who can be amused by serious talk, and can
discourse merrily about justice and the like.
  Soc. True, Phaedrus. But nobler far is the serious pursuit of the
dialectician, who, finding a congenial soul, by the help of science
sows and plants therein words which are able to help themselves and
him who planted them, and are not unfruitful, but have in them a
seed which others brought up in different soils render immortal,
making the possessors of it happy to the utmost extent of human
happiness.
  Phaedr. Far nobler, certainly.
  Soc. And now, Phaedrus, having agreed upon the premises we decide
about the conclusion.
  Phaedr. About what conclusion?
  Soc. About Lysias, whom we censured, and his art of writing, and his
discourses, and the rhetorical skill or want of skill which was
shown in them-these are the questions which we sought to determine,
and they brought us to this point. And I think that we are now
pretty well informed about the nature of art and its opposite.
  Phaedr. Yes, I think with you; but I wish that you would repeat what
was said.
  Soc. Until a man knows the truth of the several particulars of which
he is writing or speaking, and is able to define them as they are, and
having defined them again to divide them until they can be no longer
divided, and until in like manner he is able to discern the nature
of the soul, and discover the different modes of discourse which are
adapted to different natures, and to arrange and dispose them in
such a way that the simple form of speech may be addressed to the
simpler nature, and the complex and composite to the more complex
nature-until he has accomplished all this, he will be unable to handle
arguments according to rules of art, as far as their nature allows
them to be subjected to art, either for the purpose of teaching or
persuading;-such is the view which is implied in the whole preceding
argument.
  Phaedr. Yes, that was our view, certainly.
  Soc. Secondly, as to the censure which was passed on the speaking or
writing of discourses, and how they might be rightly or wrongly
censured-did not our previous argument show?-
  Phaedr. Show what?
  Soc. That whether Lysias or any other writer that ever was or will
be, whether private man or statesman, proposes laws and so becomes the
author of a political treatise, fancying that there is any great
certainty and clearness in his performance, the fact of his so writing
is only a disgrace to him, whatever men may say. For not to know the
nature of justice and injustice, and good and evil, and not to be able
to distinguish the dream from the reality, cannot in truth be
otherwise than disgraceful to him, even though he have the applause of
the whole world.
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. But he who thinks that in the written word there is necessarily
much which is not serious, and that neither poetry nor prose, spoken
or written, is of any great value, if, like the compositions of the
rhapsodes, they are only recited in order to be believed, and not with
any view to criticism or instruction; and who thinks that even the
best of writings are but a reminiscence of what we know, and that only
in principles of justice and goodness and nobility taught and
communicated orally for the sake of instruction and graven in the
soul, which is the true way of writing, is there clearness and
perfection and seriousness, and that such principles are a man's own
and his legitimate offspring;-being, in the first place, the word
which he finds in his own bosom; secondly, the brethren and
descendants and relations of his others;-and who cares for them and no
others-this is the right sort of man; and you and I, Phaedrus, would
pray that we may become like him.
  Phaedr. That is most assuredly my desire and prayer.
  Soc. And now the play is played out; and of rhetoric enough. Go
and tell Lysias that to the fountain and school of the Nymphs we
went down, and were bidden by them to convey a message to him and to
other composers of speeches-to Homer and other writers of poems,
whether set to music or not; and to Solon and others who have composed
writings in the form of political discourses which they would term
laws-to all of them we are to say that if their compositions are based
on knowledge of the truth, and they can defend or prove them, when
they are put to the test, by spoken arguments, which leave their
writings poor in comparison of them, then they are to be called, not
only poets, orators, legislators, but are worthy of a higher name,
befitting the serious pursuit of their life.
  Phaedr. What name would you assign to them?
  Soc. Wise, I may not call them; for that is a great name which
belongs to God alone,-lovers of wisdom or philosophers is their modest
and befitting title.
  Phaedr. Very suitable.
  Soc. And he who cannot rise above his own compilations and
compositions, which he has been long patching, and piecing, adding
some and taking away some, may be justly called poet or speech-maker
or law-maker.
  Phaedr. Certainly.
  Soc. Now go and tell this to your companion.
  Phaedr. But there is also a friend of yours who ought not to be
forgotten.
  Soc. Who is he?
  Phaedr. Isocrates the fair:-What message will you send to him, and
how shall we describe him?
  Soc. Isocrates is still young, Phaedrus; but I am willing to
hazard a prophecy concerning him.
  Phaedr. What would you prophesy?
  Soc. I think that he has a genius which soars above the orations
of Lysias, and that his character is cast in a finer mould. My
impression of him is that he will marvelously improve as he grows
older, and that all former rhetoricians will be as children in
comparison of him. And I believe that he will not be satisfied with
rhetoric, but that there is in him a divine inspiration which will
lead him to things higher still. For he has an element of philosophy
in his nature. This is the message of the gods dwelling in this place,
and which I will myself deliver to Isocrates, who is my delight; and
do you give the other to Lysias, who is yours.
  Phaedr. I will; and now as the heat is abated let us depart.
  Soc. Should we not offer up a prayer first of all to the local
deities?
  Phaedr. By all means.
  Soc. Beloved Pan, and all ye other gods who haunt this place, give
me beauty in the inward soul; and may the outward and inward man be at
one. May I reckon the wise to be the wealthy, and may I have such a
quantity of gold as a temperate man and he only can bear and
carry.-Anything more? The prayer, I think, is enough for me.
  Phaedr. Ask the same for me, for friends should have all things in
common.
  Soc. Let us go.


                            -THE END-
.


       The Internet Wiretap Online Edition of

                   THE REPUBLIC
                     BY PLATO

                   Translated by
                BENJAMIN JOWETT, M.A.

        Late Regius Professor of Greek in the
                University of Oxford

            New York, P. F. Collier & Son
          Copyright 1901 The Colonial Press

         Prepared by <dell@wiretap.spies.com>


About the online edition.

This was scanned from the 1901 edition and mechanically
checked against a commercial copy of the Republic from CDROM.
Differences were corrected against the paper edition. The
text itself is thus a highly accurate rendition.

This text is in the PUBLIC DOMAIN, released August 1993.


CONTENTS

   I   Of Wealth, Justice, Moderation, and their Opposites
  II   The Individual, the State, and Education
 III   The Arts in Education
  IV   Wealth, Poverty, and Virtue
   V   On Matrimony and Philosophy
  VI   The Philosophy of Government
 VII   On Shadows and Realities in Education
VIII   Four Forms of Government
  IX   On Wrong or Right Government, and the Pleasures of Each
   X   The Recompense of Life


                        BOOK I
  OF WEALTH, JUSTICE, MODERATION, AND THEIR OPPOSITES

               Persons of the Dialogue

   SOCRATES, who is the narrator.     CEPHALUS.
   GLACON.                            THRASYMACHUS.
   ADEIMANTUS.                        CLEITOPHON.
   POLEMARCHUS.

           And others who are mute auditors.

The scene is laid in the house of Cephalus at the Piraeus; and
the whole dialogue is narrated by Socrates the day after it actually
took place to Timaeus Hermocrates, Critias, and a nameless person,
who are introduced in the Timaeus.


  I WENT down yesterday to the Piraeus with Glaucon, the
son of Ariston, that I might offer up my prayers to the
goddess; and also because I wanted to see in what man-
ner they would celebrate the festival, which was a new thing.
I was delighted with the procession of the inhabitants; but
that of the Thracians was equally, if not more, beautiful.
When we had finished our prayers and viewed the spectacle,
we turned in the direction of the city; and at that instant
Polemarchus, the son of Cephalus, chanced to catch sight of
us from a distance as we were starting on our way home, and
told his servant to run and bid us wait for him. The servant
took hold of me by the cloak behind, and said, Polemarchus
desires you to wait.

  I turned round, and asked him where his master was.

  There he is, said the youth, coming after you, if you will
only wait.

  Certainly we will, said Glaucon; and in a few minutes
Polemarchus appeared, and with him Adeimantus, Glaucon's
brother, Niceratus, the son of Nicias, and several others who
had been at the procession.

  Polemarchus said to me, I perceive, Socrates, that you and
your companion are already on your way to the city.

  You are not far wrong, I said.

  But do you see, he rejoined, how many we are?

  Of course.

  And are you stronger than all these? for if not, you will
have to remain where you are.

  May there not be the alternative, I said, that we may per-
suade you to let us go?

  But can you persuade us, if we refuse to listen to you? he
said.

  Certainly not, replied Glaucon.

  Then we are not going to listen; of that you may be assured.

  Adeimantus added: Has no one told you of the torch-race
on horseback in honor of the goddess which will take place
in the evening?

  With horses! I replied. That is a novelty. Will horsemen
carry torches and pass them one to another during the race?

  Yes, said Polemarchus; and not only so, but a festival will
be celebrated at night, which you certainly ought to see. Let
us rise soon after supper and see this festival; there will be
a gathering of young men, and we will have a good talk.
Stay then, and do not be perverse.

  Glaucon said, I suppose, since you insist, that we must.

  Very good, I replied.

  Accordingly we went with Polemarchus to his house; and
there we found his brothers Lysias and Euthydemus, and
with them Thrasymachus the Chalcedonian, Charmantides the
Paeanian, and Cleitophon, the son of Aristonymus. There too
was Cephalus, the father of Polemarchus, whom I had not seen
for a long time, and I thought him very much aged. He was
seated on a cushioned chair, and had a garland on his head,
for he had been sacrificing in the court; and there were some
other chairs in the room arranged in a semicircle, upon which
we sat down by him. He saluted me eagerly, and then he said:

  You don't come to see me, Socrates, as often as you ought:
If I were still able to go and see you I would not ask you to
come to me. But at my age I can hardly get to the city, and
therefore you should come oftener to the Piraeus. For, let
me tell you that the more the pleasures of the body fade away,
the greater to me are the pleasure and charm of conversation.
Do not, then, deny my request, but make our house your re-
sort and keep company with these young men; we are old
friends, and you will be quite at home with us.

  I replied: There is nothing which for my part I like bet-
ter, Cephalus, than conversing with aged men; for I regard
them as travellers who have gone a journey which I too may
have to go, and of whom I ought to inquire whether the way
is smooth and easy or rugged and difficult. And this is a
question which I should like to ask of you, who have arrived
at that time which the poets call the "threshold of old age":
Is life harder toward the end, or what report do you give of it?

  I will tell you, Socrates, he said, what my own feeling is.
Men of my age flock together; we are birds of a feather, as
the old proverb says; and at our meetings the tale of my
acquaintance commonly is: I cannot eat, I cannot drink; the
pleasures of youth and love are fled away; there was a good
time once, but now that is gone, and life is no longer life.
Some complain of the slights which are put upon them by
relations, and they will tell you sadly of how many evils their
old age is the cause. But to me, Socrates, these complainers
seem to blame that which is not really in fault. For if old
age were the cause, I too, being old, and every other old man
would have felt as they do. But this is not my own experi-
ence, nor that of others whom I have known. How well I
remember the aged poet Sophocles, when in answer to the
question, How does love suit with age, Sophocles--are you
still the man you were? Peace, he replied; most gladly have
I escaped the thing of which you speak; I feel as if I had
escaped from a mad and furious master. His words have
often occurred to my mind since, and they seem as good to
me now as at the time when he uttered them. For certainly
old age has a great sense of calm and freedom; when the pas-
sions relax their hold, then, as Sophocles says, we are freed
from the grasp not of one mad master only, but of many.
The truth is, Socrates, that these regrets, and also the com-
plaints about relations, are to be attributed to the same cause,
which is not old age, but men's characters and tempers; for
he who is of a calm and happy nature will hardly feel the
pressure of age, but to him who is of an opposite disposition
youth and age are equally a burden.

  I listened in admiration, and wanting to draw him out, that
he might go on--Yes, Cephalus, I said; but I rather suspect
that people in general are not convinced by you when you
speak thus; they think that old age sits lightly upon you, not
because of your happy disposition, but because you are rich,
and wealth is well known to be a great comforter.

  You are right, he replied; they are not convinced: and
there is something in what they say; not, however, so much
as they imagine. I might answer them as Themistocles an-
swered the Seriphian who was abusing him and saying that
he was famous, not for his own merits but because he was
an Athenian: "If you had been a native of my country or
I of yours, neither of us would have been famous." And to
those who are not rich and are impatient of old age, the same
reply may be made; for to the good poor man old age can-
not be a light burden, nor can a bad rich man ever have peace
with himself.

  May I ask, Cephalus, whether your fortune was for the most
part inherited or acquired by you?

  Acquired! Socrates; do you want to know how much I
acquired? In the art of making money I have been midway
between my father and grandfather: for my grandfather,
whose name I bear, doubled and trebled the value of his patri-
mony, that which he inherited being much what I possess now;
but my father, Lysanias, reduced the property below what it
is at present; and I shall be satisfied if I leave to these my
sons not less, but a little more, than I received.

  That was why I asked you the question, I replied, because
I see that you are indifferent about money, which is a charac-
teristic rather of those who have inherited their fortunes than of
those who have acquired them; the makers of fortunes have a
second love of money as a creation of their own, resembling the
affection of authors for their own poems, or of parents for their
children, besides that natural love of it for the sake of use
and profit which is common to them and all men. And hence
they are very bad company, for they can talk about nothing
but the praises of wealth.
That is true, he said.

  Yes, that is very true, but may I ask another question?--
What do you consider to be the greatest blessing which you
have reaped from your wealth?

  One, he said, of which I could not expect easily to convince
others. For let me tell you, Socrates, that when a man thinks
himself to be near death, fears and cares enter into his mind
which he never had before; the tales of a world below and the
punishment which is exacted there of deeds done here were
once a laughing matter to him, but now he is tormented with
the thought that they may be true: either from the weakness of
age, or because he is now drawing nearer to that other place,
he has a clearer view of these things; suspicions and alarms
crowd thickly upon him, and he begins to reflect and consider
what wrongs he has done to others. And when he finds that
the sum of his transgressions is great he will many a time like
a child start up in his sleep for fear, and he is filled with dark
forebodings. But to him who is conscious of no sin, sweet
hope, as Pindar charmingly says, is the kind nurse of his age:

  "Hope," he says, "cherishes the soul of him who lives in justice and
   holiness, and is the nurse of his age and the companion of his journey--
   hope which is mightiest to sway the restless soul of man."

  How admirable are his words! And the great blessing of
riches, I do not say to every man, but to a good man, is, that he
has had no occasion to deceive or to defraud others, either in-
tentionally or unintentionally; and when he departs to the world
below he is not in any apprehension about offerings due to the
gods or debts which he owes to men. Now to this peace of
mind the possession of wealth greatly contributes; and there-
fore I say, that, setting one thing against another, of the many
advantages which wealth has to give, to a man of sense this is
in my opinion the greatest.

  Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice,
what is it?--to speak the truth and to pay your debts--no more
than this? And even to this are there not exceptions? Sup-
pose that a friend when in his right mind has deposited arms
with me and he asks for them when he is not in his right mind,
ought I to give them back to him? No one would say that I
ought or that I should be right in doing so, any more than
they would say that I ought always to speak the truth to one
who is in his condition.

  You are quite right, he replied.

  But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts
is not a correct definition of justice.

  Quite correct, Socrates, if Simonides is to be believed, said
Polemarchus, interposing.

  I fear, said Cephalus, that I must go now, for I have to look
after the sacrifices, and I hand over the argument to Polem-
archus and the company.

  Is not Polemarchus your heir? I said.

  To be sure, he answered, and went away laughing to the sac-
rifices.

  Tell me then, O thou heir of the argument, what did Simon-
ides say, and according to you, truly say, about justice?

  He said that the repayment of a debt is just, and in saying
so he appears to me to be right.

  I shall be sorry to doubt the word of such a wise and inspired
man, but his meaning, though probably clear to you, is the re-
verse of clear to me. For he certainly does not mean, as we
were just now saying, that I ought to return a deposit of arms
or of anything else to one who asks for it when he is not in his
right senses; and yet a deposit cannot be denied to be a debt.

  True.

  Then when the person who asks me is not in his right mind I
am by no means to make the return?

  Certainly not.

  When Simonides said that the repayment of a debt was jus-
tice, he did not mean to include that case?

  Certainly not; for he thinks that a friend ought always to
do good to a friend, and never evil.

  You mean that the return of a deposit of gold which is to
the injury of the receiver, if the two parties are friends, is not
the repayment of a debt--that is what you would imagine him
to say?

  Yes.

  And are enemies also to receive what we owe to them?

  To be sure, he said, they are to receive what we owe them;
and an enemy, as I take it, owes to an enemy that which is due
or proper to him--that is to say, evil.

  Simonides, then, after the manner of poets, would seem to
have spoken darkly of the nature of justice; for he really meant
to say that justice is the giving to each man what is proper to
him, and this he termed a debt.

  That must have been his meaning, he said.

  By heaven! I replied; and if we asked him what due or proper
thing is given by medicine, and to whom, what answer do you
think that he would make to us?

  He would surely reply that medicine gives drugs and meat
and drink to human bodies.

  And what due or proper thing is given by cookery, and to
what?

  Seasoning to food.

  And what is that which justice gives, and to whom?

  If, Socrates, we are to be guided at all by the analogy of the
preceding instances, then justice is the art which gives good to
friends and evil to enemies.

  That is his meaning, then?

  I think so.

  And who is best able to do good to his friends and evil to his
enemies in time of sickness?

  The physician.

  Or when they are on a voyage, amid the perils of the sea?

  The pilot.

  And in what sort of actions or with a view to what result is
the just man most able to do harm to his enemy and good to
his friend?

  In going to war against the one and in making alliances with
the other.

  But when a man is well, my dear Polemarchus, there is no
need of a physician?

  No.

  And he who is not on a voyage has no need of a pilot?

  No.

  Then in time of peace justice will be of no use?

  I am very far from thinking so.

  You think that justice may be of use in peace as well as in
war?

  Yes.

  Like husbandry for the acquisition of corn?

  Yes.

  Or like shoemaking for the acquisition of shoes--that is what
you mean?

  Yes.

  And what similar use or power of acquisition has justice in
time of peace?

  In contracts, Socrates, justice is of use.

  And by contracts you mean partnerships?

  Exactly.

  But is the just man or the skilful player a more useful and
better partner at a game of draughts?

  The skilful player.

  And in the laying of bricks and stones is the just man a more
useful or better partner than the builder?

  Quite the reverse.

  Then in what sort of partnership is the just man a better
partner than the harp-player, as in playing the harp the harp-
player is certainly a better partner than the just man?

  In a money partnership.

  Yes, Polemarchus, but surely not in the use of money; for
you do not want a just man to be your counsellor in the pur-
chase or sale of a horse; a man who is knowing about horses
would be better for that, would he not?

  Certainly.

  And when you want to buy a ship, the shipwright or the
pilot would be better?

  True.

  Then what is that joint use of silver or gold in which the
just man is to be preferred?

  When you want a deposit to be kept safely.

  You mean when money is not wanted, but allowed to lie?

  Precisely.

  That is to say, justice is useful when money is useless?

  That is the inference.

  And when you want to keep a pruning-hook safe, then jus-
tice is useful to the individual and to the State; but when you
want to use it, then the art of the vine-dresser?

  Clearly.

  And when you want to keep a shield or a lyre, and not to use
them, you would say that justice is useful; but when you want
to use them, then the art of the soldier or of the musician?

  Certainly.

  And so of all other things--justice is useful when they are
useless, and useless when they are useful?

  That is the inference.

  Then justice is not good for much. But let us consider this
further point: Is not he who can best strike a blow in a boxing
match or in any kind of fighting best able to ward off a blow?

  Certainly.

  And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from
a disease is best able to create one?

  True.

  And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal
a march upon the enemy?

  Certainly.

  Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good
thief?

  That, I suppose, is to be inferred.

  Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good
at stealing it.

  That is implied in the argument.

  Then after all, the just man has turned out to be a thief.
And this is a lesson which I suspect you must have learnt out
of Homer; for he, speaking of Autolycus, the maternal grand-
father of Odysseus, who is a favorite of his, affirms that

  "He was excellent above all men in theft and perjury."

And so, you and Homer and Simonides are agreed that justice
is an art of theft; to be practised, however, "for the good of
friends and for the harm of enemies"--that was what you were
saying?

  No, certainly not that, though I do not now know what I
did say; but I still stand by the latter words.

  Well, there is another question: By friends and enemies do
we mean those who are so really, or only in seeming?

  Surely, he said, a man may be expected to love those whom
he thinks good, and to hate those whom he thinks evil.

  Yes, but do not persons often err about good and evil: many
who are not good seem to be so, and conversely?

  That is true.

  Then to them the good will be enemies and the evil will be
their friends?
True.

  And in that case they will be right in doing good to the evil
and evil to the good?

  Clearly.

  But the good are just and would not do an injustice?

  True.

  Then according to your argument it is just to injure those
who do no wrong?

  Nay, Socrates; the doctrine is immoral.

  Then I suppose that we ought to do good to the just and
harm to the unjust?

  I like that better.

  But see the consequence: Many a man who is ignorant of
human nature has friends who are bad friends, and in that case
he ought to do harm to them; and he has good enemies whom
he ought to benefit; but, if so, we shall be saying the very op-
posite of that which we affirmed to be the meaning of Simon-
ides.

  Very true, he said; and I think that we had better correct
an error into which we seem to have fallen in the use of the
words "friend" and "enemy."

  What was the error, Polemarchus? I asked.

  We assumed that he is a friend who seems to be or who is
thought good.

  And how is the error to be corrected?

  We should rather say that he is a friend who is, as well as
seems, good; and that he who seems only and is not good, only
seems to be and is not a friend; and of an enemy the same may
be said.

  You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad
our enemies?

  Yes.

  And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is
just to do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we
should further say: It is just to do good to our friends when
they are good, and harm to our enemies when they are evil?

  Yes, that appears to me to be the truth.

  But ought the just to injure anyone at all?

  Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked
and his enemies.

  When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated?

  The latter.

  Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses,
not of dogs?

  Yes, of horses.

  And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and
not of horses?

  Of course.

  And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that
which is the proper virtue of man?

  Certainly.

  And that human virtue is justice?

  To be sure.

  Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?

  That is the result.

  But can the musician by his art make men unmusical?

  Certainly not.

  Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen?

  Impossible.

  And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking
generally, can the good by virtue make them bad?

  Assuredly not.

  Any more than heat can produce cold?

  It cannot.

  Or drought moisture?

  Clearly not.

  Nor can the good harm anyone?

  Impossible.

  And the just is the good?

  Certainly.

  Then to injure a friend or anyone else is not the act of a
just man, but of the opposite, who is the unjust?

  I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.

  Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment of
debts, and that good is the debt which a just man owes to his
friends, and evil the debt which he owes to his enemies--to say
this is not wise; for it is not true, if, as has been clearly shown,
the injuring of another can be in no case just.

  I agree with you, said Polemarchus.

  Then you and I are prepared to take up arms against anyone
who attributes such a saying to Simonides or Bias or Pittacus,
or any other wise man or seer?

  I am quite ready to do battle at your side, he said.

  Shall I tell you whose I believe the saying to be?

  Whose?

  I believe that Periander or Perdiccas or Xerxes or Ismenias
the Theban, or some other rich and mighty man, who had a
great opinion of his own power, was the first to say that justice
is "doing good to your friends and harm to your enemies."

  Most true, he said.

  Yes, I said; but if this definition of justice also breaks down,
what other can be offered?

  Several times in the course of the discussion Thrasymachus
had made an attempt to get the argument into his own hands,
and had been put down by the rest of the company, who wanted
to hear the end. But when Polemarchus and I had done speak-
ing and there was a pause, he could no longer hold his peace;
and, gathering himself up, he came at us like a wild beast,
seeking to devour us. We were quite panic-stricken at the
sight of him.

  He roared out to the whole company: What folly, Socrates,
has taken possession of you all? And why, sillybillies, do you
knock under to one another? I say that if you want really to
know what justice is, you should not only ask but answer, and
you should not seek honor to yourself from the refutation of an
opponent, but have your own answer; for there is many a one
who can ask and cannot answer. And now I will not have you
say that justice is duty or advantage or profit or gain or interest,
for this sort of nonsense will not do for me; I must have clear-
ness and accuracy.

  I was panic-stricken at his words, and could not look at him
without trembling. Indeed I believe that if I had not fixed my
eye upon him, I should have been struck dumb: but when I saw
his fury rising, I looked at him first, and was therefore able to
reply to him.

  Thrasymachus, I said, with a quiver, don't be hard upon us.
Polemarchus and I may have been guilty of a little mistake in
the argument, but I can assure you that the error was not in-
tentional. If we were seeking for a piece of gold, you would
not imagine that we were "knocking under to one another,"
and so losing our chance of finding it. And why, when we are
seeking for justice, a thing more precious than many pieces of
gold, do you say that we are weakly yielding to one another
and not doing our utmost to get at the truth? Nay, my good
friend, we are most willing and anxious to do so, but the fact
is that we cannot. And if so, you people who know all things
should pity us and not be angry with us.

  How characteristic of Socrates! he replied, with a bitter
laugh; that's your ironical style! Did I not foresee--have I
not already told you, that whatever he was asked he would
refuse to answer, and try irony or any other shuffle, in order
that he might avoid answering?

  You are a philosopher, Thrasymachus, I replied, and well
know that if you ask a person what numbers make up twelve,
taking care to prohibit him whom you ask from answering
twice six, or three times four, or six times two, or four times
three, "for this sort of nonsense will not do for me"--then
obviously, if that is your way of putting the question, no one
can answer you. But suppose that he were to retort: "Thra-
symachus, what do you mean? If one of these numbers which
you interdict be the true answer to the question, am I falsely
to say some other number which is not the right one?--is that
your meaning?"--How would you answer him?

  Just as if the two cases were at all alike! he said.

  Why should they not be? I replied; and even if they are not,
but only appear to be so to the person who is asked, ought he
not to say what he thinks, whether you and I forbid him or not?

  I presume then that you are going to make one of the inter-
dicted answers?

  I dare say that I may, notwithstanding the danger, if upon
reflection I approve of any of them.

  But what if I give you an answer about justice other and
better, he said, than any of these? What do you deserve to
have done to you?

  Done to me!--as becomes the ignorant, I must learn from
the wise--that is what I deserve to have done to me.

  What, and no payment! A pleasant notion!

  I will pay when I have the money, I replied.

  But you have, Socrates, said Glaucon: and you, Thrasyma-
chus, need be under no anxiety about money, for we will all
make a contribution for Socrates.

  Yes, he replied, and then Socrates will do as he always does
--refuse to answer himself, but take and pull to pieces the
answer of someone else.

  Why, my good friend, I said, how can anyone answer who
knows, and says that he knows, just nothing; and who, even
if he has some faint notions of his own, is told by a man of
authority not to utter them? The natural thing is, that the
speaker should be someone like yourself who professes to know
and can tell what he knows. Will you then kindly answer, for
the edification of the company and of myself?

  Glaucon and the rest of the company joined in my request,
and Thrasymachus, as anyone might see, was in reality eager
to speak; for he thought that he had an excellent answer, and
would distinguish himself. But at first he affected to insist
on my answering; at length he consented to begin. Behold,
he said, the wisdom of Socrates; he refuses to teach himself,
and goes about learning of others, to whom he never even says,
Thank you.

  That I learn of others, I replied, is quite true; but that I am
ungrateful I wholly deny. Money I have none, and therefore
I pay in praise, which is all I have; and how ready I am to
praise anyone who appears to me to speak well you will very
soon find out when you answer; for I expect that you will an-
swer well.

  Listen, then, he said; I proclaim that justice is nothing else
than the interest of the stronger. And now why do you not
praise me? But of course you won't.

  Let me first understand you, I replied. Justice, as you say,
is the interest of the stronger. What, Thrasymachus, is the
meaning of this? You cannot mean to say that because Polyd-
amas, the pancratiast, is stronger than we are, and finds the
eating of beef conducive to his bodily strength, that to eat beef
is therefore equally for our good who are weaker than he is,
and right and just for us?

  That's abominable of you, Socrates; you take the words in
the sense which is most damaging to the argument.

  Not at all, my good sir, I said; I am trying to understand
them; and I wish that you would be a little clearer.

  Well, he said, have you never heard that forms of govern-
ment differ--there are tyrannies, and there are democracies,
and there are aristocracies?

  Yes, I know.

  And the government is the ruling power in each State?

  Certainly.

  And the different forms of government make laws demo-
cratical, aristocratical, tyrannical, with a view to their several
interests; and these laws, which are made by them for their
own interests, are the justice which they deliver to their sub-
jects, and him who transgresses them they punish as a breaker
of the law, and unjust. And that is what I mean when I say
that in all States there is the same principle of justice, which
is the interest of the government; and as the government must
be supposed to have power, the only reasonable conclusion is
that everywhere there is one principle of justice, which is the
interest of the stronger.

  Now I understand you, I said; and whether you are right or
not I will try to discover. But let me remark that in defining
justice you have yourself used the word "interest," which you
forbade me to use. It is true, however, that in your definition
the words "of the stronger" are added.

  A small addition, you must allow, he said.

  Great or small, never mind about that: we must first inquire
whether what you are saying is the truth. Now we are both
agreed that justice is interest of some sort, but you go on to say
"of the stronger"; about this addition I am not so sure, and
must therefore consider further.

  Proceed.

  I will; and first tell me, Do you admit that it is just for sub-
jects to obey their rulers?

  I do.

  But are the rulers of States absolutely infallible, or are they
sometimes liable to err?

  To be sure, he replied, they are liable to err?

  Then in making their laws they may sometimes make them
rightly, and sometimes not?

  True.

  When they make them rightly, they make them agreeably
to their interest; when they are mistaken, contrary to their in-
terest; you admit that?

  Yes.

  And the laws which they make must be obeyed by their sub-
jects--and that is what you call justice?

  Doubtless.

  Then justice, according to your argument, is not only obedi-
ence to the interest of the stronger, but the reverse?

  What is that you are saying? he asked.

  I am only repeating what you are saying, I believe. But
let us consider: Have we not admitted that the rulers may be
mistaken about their own interest in what they command, and
also that to obey them is justice? Has not that been admitted?

  Yes.

  Then you must also have acknowledged justice not to be for
the interest of the stronger, when the rulers unintentionally
command things to be done which are to their own injury. For
if, as you say, justice is the obedience which the subject renders
to their commands, in that case, O wisest of men, is there any
escape from the conclusion that the weaker are commanded to
do, not what is for the interest, but what is for the injury of
the stronger?

  Nothing can be clearer, Socrates, said Polemarchus.

  Yes, said Cleitophon, interposing, if you are allowed to be
his witness.

  But there is no need of any witness, said Polemarchus, for
Thrasymachus himself acknowledges that rulers may some-
time command what is not for their own interest, and that for
subjects to obey them is justice.

  Yes, Polemarchus--Thrasymachus said that for subjects to
do what was commanded by their rulers is just.

  Yes, Cleitophon, but he also said that justice is the interest
of the stronger, and, while admitting both these propositions,
he further acknowledged that the stronger may command the
weaker who are his subjects to do what is not for his own inter-
est; whence follows that justice is the injury quite as much as
the interest of the stronger.

  But, said Cleitophon, he meant by the interest of the stronger
what the stronger thought to be his interest--this was what
the weaker had to do; and this was affirmed by him to be justice.

  Those were not his words, rejoined Polemarchus.

  Never mind, I replied, if he now says that they are, let us
accept his statement. Tell me, Thrasymachus, I said, did you
mean by justice what the stronger thought to be his interest,
whether really so or not?

  Certainly not, he said. Do you suppose that I call him who
is mistaken the stronger at the time when he is mistaken?

  Yes, I said, my impression was that you did so, when you
admitted that the ruler was not infallible, but might be some-
times mistaken.

  You argue like an informer, Socrates. Do you mean, for
example, that he who is mistaken about the sick is a physician
in that he is mistaken? or that he who errs in arithmetic or
grammar is an arithmetician or grammarian at the time when
he is making the mistake, in respect of the mistake? True, we
say that the physician or arithmetician or grammarian has made
a mistake, but this is only a way of speaking; for the fact is that
neither the grammarian nor any other person of skill ever
makes a mistake in so far as he is what his name implies; they
none of them err unless their skill fails them, and then they
cease to be skilled artists. No artist or sage or ruler errs at the
time when he is what his name implies; though he is commonly
said to err, and I adopted the common mode of speaking. But
to be perfectly accurate, since you are such a lover of accuracy,
we should say that the ruler, in so far as he is a ruler, is unerr-
ing, and, being unerring, always commands that which is for
his own interest; and the subject is required to execute his com-
mands; and therefore, as I said at first and now repeat, justice
is the interest of the stronger.

  Indeed, Thrasymachus, and do I really appear to you to
argue like an informer?

  Certainly, he replied.

  And do you suppose that I ask these questions with any de-
sign of injuring you in the argument?

  Nay, he replied, "suppose" is not the word--I know it; but
you will be found out, and by sheer force of argument you will
never prevail.

  I shall not make the attempt, my dear man; but to avoid any
misunderstanding occurring between us in future, let me ask,
in what sense do you speak of a ruler or stronger whose inter-
est, as you were saying, he being the superior, it is just that
the inferior should execute--is he a ruler in the popular or in
the strict sense of the term?

  In the strictest of all senses, he said. And now cheat and
play the informer if you can; I ask no quarter at your hands.
But you never will be able, never.

  And do you imagine, I said, that I am such a madman as to
try and cheat Thrasymachus? I might as well shave a lion.

  Why, he said, you made the attempt a minute ago, and you
failed.

  Enough, I said, of these civilities. It will be better that I
should ask you a question: Is the physician, taken in that strict
sense of which you are speaking, a healer of the sick or a maker
of money? And remember that I am now speaking of the true
physician.

  A healer of the sick, he replied.

  And the pilot--that is to say, the true pilot--is he a captain
of sailors or a mere sailor?

  A captain of sailors.

  The circumstance that he sails in the ship is not to be taken
into account; neither is he to be called a sailor; the name pilot
by which he is distinguished has nothing to do with sailing,
but is significant of his skill and of his authority over the sailors.

  Very true, he said.

  Now, I said, every art has an interest?

  Certainly.

  For which the art has to consider and provide?

  Yes, that is the aim of art.

  And the interest of any art is the perfection of it--this and
nothing else?

  What do you mean?

  I mean what I may illustrate negatively by the example of the
body. Suppose you were to ask me whether the body is self-
sufficing or has wants, I should reply: Certainly the body has
wants; for the body may be ill and require to be cured, and has
therefore interests to which the art of medicine ministers; and
this is the origin and intention of medicine, as you will ac-
knowledge. Am I not right?

  Quite right, he replied.

  But is the art of medicine or any other art faulty or deficient
in any quality in the same way that the eye may be deficient in
sight or the ear fail of hearing, and therefore requires another
art to provide for the interests of seeing and hearing--has art
in itself, I say, any similar liability to fault or defect, and does
every art require another supplementary art to provide for its
interests, and that another and another without end? Or have
the arts to look only after their own interests? Or have they no
need either of themselves or of another?--having no faults or
defects, they have no need to correct them, either by the exer-
cise of their own art or of any other; they have only to consider
the interest of their subject-matter. For every art remains
pure and faultless while remaining true--that is to say, while
perfect and unimpaired. Take the words in your precise sense,
and tell me whether I am not right.

  Yes, clearly.

  Then medicine does not consider the interest of medicine,
but the interest of the body?

  True, he said.

  Nor does the art of horsemanship consider the interests of
the art of horsemanship, but the interests of the horse; neither
do any other arts care for themselves, for they have no needs;
they care only for that which is the subject of their art?

  True, he said.

  But surely, Thrasymachus, the arts are the superiors and
rulers of their own subjects?

  To this he assented with a good deal of reluctance.

  Then, I said, no science or art considers or enjoins the inter-
est of the stronger or superior, but only the interest of the
subject and weaker?

  He made an attempt to contest this proposition also, but
finally acquiesced.

  Then, I continued, no physician, in so far as he is a physician,
considers his own good in what he prescribes, but the good of
his patient; for the true physician is also a ruler having the
human body as a subject, and is not a mere money-maker; that
has been admitted?

  Yes.

  And the pilot likewise, in the strict sense of the term, is a
ruler of sailors, and not a mere sailor?

  That has been admitted.

  And such a pilot and ruler will provide and prescribe for the
interest of the sailor who is under him, and not for his own or
the ruler's interest?

  He gave a reluctant "Yes."

  Then, I said, Thrasymachus, there is no one in any rule who,
in so far as he is a ruler, considers or enjoins what is for his
own interest, but always what is for the interest of his subject
or suitable to his art; to that he looks, and that alone he con-
siders in everything which he says and does.

  When we had got to this point in the argument, and every-
one saw that the definition of justice had been completely upset,
Thrasymachus, instead of replying to me, said, Tell me, Soc-
rates, have you got a nurse?

  Why do you ask such a question, I said, when you ought
rather to be answering?

  Because she leaves you to snivel, and never wipes your nose:
she has not even taught you to know the shepherd from the
sheep.

  What makes you say that? I replied.

  Because you fancy that the shepherd or neatherd fattens or
tends the sheep or oxen with a view to their own good and not
to the good of himself or his master; and you further imagine
that the rulers of States, if they are true rulers, never think of
their subjects as sheep, and that they are not studying their
own advantage day and night. Oh, no; and so entirely astray
are you in your ideas about the just and unjust as not even to
know that justice and the just are in reality another's good;
that is to say, the interest of the ruler and stronger, and the
loss of the subject and servant; and injustice the opposite; for
the unjust is lord over the truly simple and just: he is the
stronger, and his subjects do what is for his interest, and min-
ister to his happiness, which is very far from being their own.
Consider further, most foolish Socrates, that the just is always
a loser in comparison with the unjust. First of all, in private
contracts: wherever the unjust is the partner of the just you
will find that, when the partnership is dissolved, the unjust
man has always more and the just less. Secondly, in their
dealings with the State: when there is an income-tax, the just
man will pay more and the unjust less on the same amount of
income; and when there is anything to be received the one gains
nothing and the other much. Observe also what happens when
they take an office; there is the just man neglecting his affairs
and perhaps suffering other losses, and getting nothing out of
the public, because he is just; moreover he is hated by his
friends and acquaintance for refusing to serve them in unlaw-
ful ways. But all this is reversed in the case of the unjust
man. I am speaking, as before, of injustice on a large scale
in which the advantage of the unjust is most apparent; and my
meaning will be most clearly seen if we turn to that highest
form of injustice in which the criminal is the happiest of men,
and the sufferers or those who refuse to do injustice are the
most miserable--that is to say tyranny, which by fraud and
force takes away the property of others, not little by little but
wholesale; comprehending in one, things sacred as well as pro-
fane, private and public; for which acts of wrong, if he were
detected perpetrating any one of them singly, he would be pun-
ished and incur great disgrace--they who do such wrong in
particular cases are called robbers of temples, and man-stealers
and burglars and swindlers and thieves. But when a man be-
sides taking away the money of the citizens has made slaves of
them, then, instead of these names of reproach, he is termed
happy and blessed, not only by the citizens but by all who hear
of his having achieved the consummation of injustice. For
mankind censure injustice, fearing that they may be the vic-
tims of it and not because they shrink from committing it.
And thus, as I have shown, Socrates, injustice, when on a suffi-
cient scale, has more strength and freedom and mastery than
justice; and, as I said at first, justice is the interest of the
stronger, whereas injustice is a man's own profit and interest.

  Thrasymachus, when he had thus spoken, having, like a bath-
man, deluged our ears with his words, had a mind to go away.
But the company would not let him; they insisted that he
should remain and defend his position; and I myself added my
own humble request that he would not leave us. Thrasyma-
chus, I said to him, excellent man, how suggestive are your re-
marks! And are you going to run away before you have fairly
taught or learned whether they are true or not? Is the attempt
to determine the way of man's life so small a matter in your
eyes--to determine how life may be passed by each one of us
to the greatest advantage?

  And do I differ from you, he said, as to the importance of
the inquiry?

  You appear rather, I replied, to have no care or thought
about us, Thrasymachus--whether we live better or worse
from not knowing what you say you know, is to you a matter
of indifference. Prithee, friend, do not keep your knowledge
to yourself; we are a large party; and any benefit which you
confer upon us will be amply rewarded. For my own part I
openly declare that I am not convinced, and that I do not be-
lieve injustice to be more gainful than justice, even if uncon-
trolled and allowed to have free play. For, granting that there
may be an unjust man who is able to commit injustice either
by fraud or force, still this does not convince me of the superior
advantage of injustice, and there may be others who are in the
same predicament with myself. Perhaps we may be wrong;
if so, you in your wisdom should convince us that we are mis-
taken in preferring justice to injustice.

  And how am I to convince you, he said, if you are not already
convinced by what I have just said; what more can I do for
you? Would you have me put the proof bodily into your
souls?

  Heaven forbid! I said; I would only ask you to be consistent;
or, if you change, change openly and let there be no deception.
For I must remark, Thrasymachus, if you will recall what was
previously said, that although you began by defining the true
physician in an exact sense, you did not observe a like exact-
ness when speaking of the shepherd; you thought that the
shepherd as a shepherd tends the sheep not with a view to their
own good, but like a mere diner or banqueter with a view to
the pleasures of the table; or, again, as a trader for sale in the
market, and not as a shepherd. Yet surely the art of the shep-
herd is concerned only with the good of his subjects; he has
only to provide the best for them, since the perfection of the art
is already insured whenever all the requirements of it are satis-
fied. And that was what I was saying just now about the ruler.
I conceived that the art of the ruler, considered as a ruler,
whether in a State or in private life, could only regard the good
of his flock or subjects; whereas you seem to think that the
rulers in States, that is to say, the true rulers, like being in
authority.

  Think! Nay, I am sure of it.

  Then why in the case of lesser offices do men never take them
willingly without payment, unless under the idea that they
govern for the advantage not of themselves but of others? Let
me ask you a question: Are not the several arts different, by
reason of their each having a separate function? And, my
dear illustrious friend, do say what you think, that we may
make a little progress.

  Yes, that is the difference, he replied.

  And each art gives us a particular good and not merely a
general one--medicine, for example, gives us health; naviga-
tion, safety at sea, and so on?

  Yes, he said.

  And the art of payment has the special function of giving
pay: but we do not confuse this with other arts, any more than
the art of the pilot is to be confused with the art of medicine,
because the health of the pilot may be improved by a sea voy-
age. You would not be inclined to say, would you? that navi-
gation is the art of medicine, at least if we are to adopt your
exact use of language?

  Certainly not.

  Or because a man is in good health when he receives pay
you would not say that the art of payment is medicine?

  I should not.

  Nor would you say that medicine is the art of receiving pay
because a man takes fees when he is engaged in healing?

  Certainly not.

  And we have admitted, I said, that the good of each art is
specially confined to the art?

  Yes.

  Then, if there be any good which all artists have in common,
that is to be attributed to something of which they all have the
common use?

  True, he replied.

  And when the artist is benefited by receiving pay the ad-
vantage is gained by an additional use of the art of pay, which
is not the art professed by him?

  He gave a reluctant assent to this.

  Then the pay is not derived by the several artists from their
respective arts. But the truth is, that while the art of medicine
gives health, and the art of the builder builds a house, another
art attends them which is the art of pay. The various arts
may be doing their own business and benefiting that over which
they preside, but would the artist receive any benefit from his
art unless he were paid as well?

  I suppose not.

  But does he therefore confer no benefit when he works for
nothing?

  Certainly, he confers a benefit.

  Then now, Thrasymachus, there is no longer any doubt that
neither arts nor governments provide for their own interests;
but, as we were before saying, they rule and provide for the
interests of their subjects who are the weaker and not the
stronger--to their good they attend and not to the good of the
superior.

  And this is the reason, my dear Thrasymachus, why,
as I was just now saying, no one is willing to govern; because
no one likes to take in hand the reformation of evils which
are not his concern, without remuneration. For, in the execu-
tion of his work, and in giving his orders to another, the true
artist does not regard his own interest, but always that of his
subjects; and therefore in order that rulers may be willing to
rule, they must be paid in one of three modes of payment,
money, or honor, or a penalty for refusing.

  What do you mean, Socrates? said Glaucon. The first two
modes of payment are intelligible enough, but what the penalty
is I do not understand, or how a penalty can be a payment.

  You mean that you do not understand the nature of this pay-
ment which to the best men is the great inducement to rule?
Of course you know that ambition and avarice are held to be,
as indeed they are, a disgrace?

  Very true.

  And for this reason, I said, money and honor have no attrac-
tion for them; good men do not wish to be openly demanding
payment for governing and so to get the name of hirelings, nor
by secretly helping themselves out of the public revenues to get
the name of thieves. And not being ambitious they do not care
about honor. Wherefore necessity must be laid upon them,
and they must be induced to serve from the fear of punishment.
And this, as I imagine, is the reason why the forwardness to
take office, instead of waiting to be compelled, has been
deemed dishonorable. Now the worst part of the punishment
is that he who refuses to rule is liable to be ruled by one who is
worse than himself. And the fear of this, as I conceive, in-
duces the good to take office, not because they would, but be-
cause they cannot help--not under the idea that they are going
to have any benefit or enjoyment themselves, but as a necessity,
and because they are not able to commit the task of ruling to
anyone who is better than themselves, or indeed as good. For
there is reason to think that if a city were composed entirely
of good men, then to avoid office would be as much an object
of contention as to obtain office is at present; then we should
have plain proof that the true ruler is not meant by nature to
regard his own interest, but that of his subjects; and everyone
who knew this would choose rather to receive a benefit from
another than to have the trouble of conferring one. So far
am I from agreeing with Thrasymachus that justice is the in-
terest of the stronger. This latter question need not be further
discussed at present; but when Thrasymachus says that the
life of the unjust is more advantageous than that of the just,
his new statement appears to me to be of a far more serious
character. Which of us has spoken truly? And which sort
of life, Glaucon, do you prefer?

  I for my part deem the life of the just to be the more ad-
vantageous, he answered.

  Did you hear all the advantages of the unjust which Thra-
symachus was rehearsing?

  Yes, I heard him, he replied, but he has not convinced me.

  Then shall we try to find some way of convincing him, if we
can, that he is saying what is not true?

  Most certainly, he replied.

  If, I said, he makes a set speech and we make another re-
counting all the advantages of being just, and he answers and
we rejoin, there must be a numbering and measuring of the
goods which are claimed on either side, and in the end we shall
want judges to decide; but if we proceed in our inquiry as we
lately did, by making admissions to one another, we shall unite
the offices of judge and advocate in our own persons.

  Very good, he said.

  And which method do I understand you to prefer? I said.

  That which you propose.

  Well, then, Thrasymachus, I said, suppose you begin at the
beginning and answer me. You say that perfect injustice is
more gainful than perfect justice?

  Yes, that is what I say, and I have given you my reasons.

  And what is your view about them? Would you call one
of them virtue and the other vice?

  Certainly.

  I suppose that you would call justice virtue and injustice
vice?

  What a charming notion! So likely too, seeing that I affirm
injustice to be profitable and justice not.

  What else then would you say?

  The opposite, he replied.

  And would you call justice vice?

  No, I would rather say sublime simplicity.

  Then would you call injustice malignity?

  No; I would rather say discretion.

  And do the unjust appear to you to be wise and good?

  Yes, he said; at any rate those of them who are able to be
perfectly unjust, and who have the power of subduing States
and nations; but perhaps you imagine me to be talking of cut-
purses.

  Even this profession, if undetected, has advantages,
though they are not to be compared with those of which I was
just now speaking.

  I do not think that I misapprehend your meaning, Thrasym-
achus, I replied; but still I cannot hear without amazement
that you class injustice with wisdom and virtue, and justice
with the opposite.

  Certainly I do so class them.

  Now, I said, you are on more substantial and almost unan-
swerable ground; for if the injustice which you were maintain-
ing to be profitable had been admitted by you as by others to
be vice and deformity, an answer might have been given to
you on received principles; but now I perceive that you will
call injustice honorable and strong, and to the unjust you will
attribute all the qualities which were attributed by us before
to the just, seeing that you do not hesitate to rank injustice
with wisdom and virtue.

  You have guessed most infallibly, he replied.

  Then I certainly ought not to shrink from going through
with the argument so long as I have reason to think that you,
Thrasymachus, are speaking your real mind; for I do believe
that you are now in earnest and are not amusing yourself at
our expense.

  I may be in earnest or not, but what is that to you?--to refute
the argument is your business.

  Very true, I said; that is what I have to do: But will you
be so good as answer yet one more question? Does the just
man try to gain any advantage over the just?

  Far otherwise; if he did he would not be the simple amusing
creature which he is.

  And would he try to go beyond just action?

  He would not.

  And how would he regard the attempt to gain an advantage
over the unjust; would that be considered by him as just or
unjust?

  He would think it just, and would try to gain the advantage;
but he would not be able.

  Whether he would or would not be able, I said, is not to the
point. My question is only whether the just man, while refus-
ing to have more than another just man, would wish and claim
to have more than the unjust?

  Yes, he would.

  And what of the unjust--does he claim to have more than
the just man and to do more than is just?

  Of course, he said, for he claims to have more than all men.

  And the unjust man will strive and struggle to obtain more
than the just man or action, in order that he may have more
than all?

  True.

  We may put the matter thus, I said--the just does not desire
more than his like, but more than his unlike, whereas the un-
just desires more than both his like and his unlike?

  Nothing, he said, can be better than that statement.

  And the unjust is good and wise, and the just is neither?

  Good again, he said.

  And is not the unjust like the wise and good, and the just
unlike them?

  Of course, he said, he who is of a certain nature, is like those
who are of a certain nature; he who is not, not.

  Each of them, I said, is such as his like is?

  Certainly, he replied.

  Very good, Thrasymachus, I said; and now to take the case
of the arts: you would admit that one man is a musician and
another not a musician?

  Yes.

  And which is wise and which is foolish?

  Clearly the musician is wise, and he who is not a musician is
foolish.

  And he is good in as far as he is wise, and bad in as far as
he is foolish?

  Yes.

  And you would say the same sort of thing of the physician?

  Yes.

  And do you think, my excellent friend, that a musician when
he adjusts the lyre would desire or claim to exceed or go be-
yond a musician in the tightening and loosening the strings?

  I do not think that he would.

  But he would claim to exceed the non-musician?

  Of course.

  And what would you say of the physician? In prescribing
meats and drinks would he wish to go beyond another physician
or beyond the practice of medicine?

  He would not.

  But he would wish to go beyond the non-physician?

  Yes.

  And about knowledge and ignorance in general; see whether
you think that any man who has knowledge ever would wish to
have the choice of saying or doing more than another man who
has knowledge. Would he not rather say or do the same as his
like in the same case?

  That, I suppose, can hardly be denied.

  And what of the ignorant? would he not desire to have more
than either the knowing or the ignorant?

  I dare say.

  And the knowing is wise?

  Yes.

  And the wise is good?

  True.

  Then the wise and good will not desire to gain more than his
like, but more than his unlike and opposite?

  I suppose so.

  Whereas the bad and ignorant will desire to gain more than
both?

  Yes.

  But did we not say, Thrasymachus, that the unjust goes be-
yond both his like and unlike? Were not these your words?

  They were.

  And you also said that the just will not go beyond his like,
but his unlike?

  Yes.

  Then the just is like the wise and good, and the unjust like
the evil and ignorant?

  That is the inference.

  And each of them is such as his like is?

  That was admitted.

  Then the just has turned out to be wise and good, and the
unjust evil and ignorant.

  Thrasymachus made all these admissions, not fluently, as I
repeat them, but with extreme reluctance; it was a hot sum-
mer's day, and the perspiration poured from him in torrents;
and then I saw what I had never seen before, Thrasymachus
blushing. As we were now agreed that justice was virtue and
wisdom, and injustice vice and ignorance, I proceeded to an-
other point:

  Well, I said, Thrasymachus, that matter is now settled; but
were we not also saying that injustice had strength--do you
remember?

  Yes, I remember, he said, but do not suppose that I approve
of what you are saying or have no answer; if, however, I were
to answer, you would be quite certain to accuse me of harangu-
ing; therefore either permit me to have my say out, or if you
would rather ask, do so, and I will answer "Very good," as
they say to story-telling old women, and will nod "Yes" and
"No."

  Certainly not, I said, if contrary to your real opinion.

  Yes, he said, I will, to please you, since you will not let me
speak. What else would you have?

  Nothing in the world, I said; and if you are so disposed I
will ask and you shall answer.

  Proceed.

  Then I will repeat the question which I asked before, in order
that our examination of the relative nature of justice and in-
justice may be carried on regularly. A statement was made
that injustice is stronger and more powerful than justice, but
now justice, having been identified with wisdom and virtue,
is easily shown to be stronger than injustice, if injustice is ig-
norance; this can no longer be questioned by anyone. But I
want to view the matter, Thrasymachus, in a different way:
You would not deny that a State may be unjust and may be
unjustly attempting to enslave other States, or may have already
enslaved them, and may be holding many of them in subjection?

  True, he replied; and I will add that the best and most per-
fectly unjust State will be most likely to do so.

  I know, I said, that such was your position; but what I would
further consider is, whether this power which is possessed by
the superior State can exist or be exercised without justice or
only with justice.

  If you are right in your view, and justice is wisdom, then
only with justice; but if I am right, then without justice.

  I am delighted, Thrasymachus, to see you not only nodding
assent and dissent, but making answers which are quite excel-
lent.

  That is out of civility to you, he replied.

  You are very kind, I said; and would you have the goodness
also to inform me, whether you think that a State, or an army,
or a band of robbers and thieves, or any other gang of evil-
doers could act at all if they injured one another?
No, indeed, he said, they could not.

  But if they abstained from injuring one another, then they
might act together better?

  Yes.

  And this is because injustice creates divisions and hatreds
and fighting, and justice imparts harmony and friendship; is
not that true, Thrasymachus?

  I agree, he said, because I do not wish to quarrel with you.

  How good of you, I said; but I should like to know also
whether injustice, having this tendency to arouse hatred, wher-
ever existing, among slaves or among freemen, will not make
them hate one another and set them at variance and render them
incapable of common action?

  Certainly.

  And even if injustice be found in two only, will they not
quarrel and fight, and become enemies to one another and to
the just?

  They will.

  And suppose injustice abiding in a single person, would
your wisdom say that she loses or that she retains her natural
power?

  Let us assume that she retains her power.

  Yet is not the power which injustice exercises of such a
nature that wherever she takes up her abode, whether in a city,
in an army, in a family, or in any other body, that body is, to
begin with, rendered incapable of united action by reason of
sedition and distraction? and does it not become its own enemy
and at variance with all that opposes it, and with the just? Is
not this the case?

  Yes, certainly.

  And is not injustice equally fatal when existing in a single
person--in the first place rendering him incapable of action
because he is not at unity with himself, and in the second place
making him an enemy to himself and the just? Is not that
true, Thrasymachus?

  Yes.
And, O my friend, I said, surely the gods are just?

  Granted that they are.
But, if so, the unjust will be the enemy of the gods, and the
just will be their friends?

  Feast away in triumph, and take your fill of the argument;
I will not oppose you, lest I should displease the company.
Well, then, proceed with your answers, and let me have the
remainder of my repast. For we have already shown that the
just are clearly wiser and better and abler than the unjust, and
that the unjust are incapable of common action; nay, more, that
to speak as we did of men who are evil acting at any time vig-
orously together, is not strictly true, for, if they had been per-
fectly evil, they would have laid hands upon one another; but
it is evident that there must have been some remnant of justice
in them, which enabled them to combine; if there had not been
they would have injured one another as well as their victims;
they were but half-villains in their enterprises; for had they
been whole villains, and utterly unjust, they would have been
utterly incapable of action. That, as I believe, is the truth of
the matter, and not what you said at first. But whether the just
have a better and happier life than the unjust is a further
question which we also proposed to consider. I think that
they have, and for the reasons which I have given; but still
I should like to examine further, for no light matter is at stake,
nothing less than the rule of human life.

  Proceed.

  I will proceed by asking a question: Would you not say that
a horse has some end?

  I should.

  And the end or use of a horse or of anything would be that
which could not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished,
by any other thing?

  I do not understand, he said.

  Let me explain: Can you see, except with the eye?

  Certainly not.

  Or hear, except with the ear?

  No.
These, then, may be truly said to be the ends of these organs?

  They may.

  But you can cut off a vine-branch with a dagger or with a
chisel, and in many other ways?

  Of course.

  And yet not so well as with a pruning-hook made for the
purpose?

  True.

  May we not say that this is the end of a pruning-hook?

  We may.

  Then now I think you will have no difficulty in understand-
ing my meaning when I asked the question whether the end
of anything would be that which could not be accomplished, or
not so well accomplished, by any other thing?

  I understand your meaning, he said, and assent.

  And that to which an end is appointed has also an excellence?
Need I ask again whether the eye has an end?

  It has.

  And has not the eye an excellence?

  Yes.

  And the ear has an end and an excellence also?

  True.

  And the same is true of all other things; they have each of
them an end and a special excellence?

  That is so.

  Well, and can the eyes fulfil their end if they are wanting in
their own proper excellence and have a defect instead?

  How can they, he said, if they are blind and cannot see?

  You mean to say, if they have lost their proper excellence,
which is sight; but I have not arrived at that point yet. I
would rather ask the question more generally, and only inquire
whether the things which fulfil their ends fulfil them by their
own proper excellence, and fail of fulfilling them by their own
defect?

  Certainly, he replied.

  I might say the same of the ears; when deprived of their own
proper excellence they cannot fulfil their end?

  True.

  And the same observation will apply to all other things?

  I agree.

  Well; and has not the soul an end which nothing else can
fulfil? for example, to superintend and command and deliber-
ate and the like. Are not these functions proper to the soul,
and can they rightly be assigned to any other?

  To no other.

  And is not life to be reckoned among the ends of the soul?

  Assuredly, he said.

  And has not the soul an excellence also?

  Yes.

  And can she or can she not fulfil her own ends when deprived
of that excellence?

  She cannot.

  Then an evil soul must necessarily be an evil ruler and super-
intendent, and the good soul a good ruler?

  Yes, necessarily.

  And we have admitted that justice is the excellence of the
soul, and injustice the defect of the soul?

  That has been admitted.

  Then the just soul and the just man will live well, and the
unjust man will live ill?

  That is what your argument proves.

  And he who lives well is blessed and happy, and he who lives
ill the reverse of happy?

  Certainly.

  Then the just is happy, and the unjust miserable?

  So be it.

  But happiness, and not misery, is profitable?

  Of course.

  Then, my blessed Thrasymachus, injustice can never be more
profitable than justice.

  Let this, Socrates, he said, be your entertainment at the
Bendidea.

  For which I am indebted to you, I said, now that you have
grown gentle toward me and have left off scolding. Never-
theless, I have not been well entertained; but that was my own
fault and not yours. As an epicure snatches a taste of every
dish which is successively brought to table, he not having al-
lowed himself time to enjoy the one before, so have I gone from
one subject to another without having discovered what I sought
at first, the nature of justice. I left that inquiry and turned
away to consider whether justice is virtue and wisdom, or evil
and folly; and when there arose a further question about the
comparative advantages of justice and injustice, I could not re-
frain from passing on to that. And the result of the whole
discussion has been that I know nothing at all. For I know not
what justice is, and therefore I am not likely to know whether
it is or is not a virtue, nor can I say whether the just man is
happy or unhappy.


                      BOOK II
     THE INDIVIDUAL, THE STATE, AND EDUCATION

(SOCRATES, GLAUCON.)

  WITH these words I was thinking that I had made an
end of the discussion; but the end, in truth, proved
to be only a beginning. For Glaucon, who is always
the most pugnacious of men, was dissatisfied at Thrasyma-
chus's retirement; he wanted to have the battle out. So he
said to me: Socrates, do you wish really to persuade us, or
only to seem to have persuaded us, that to be just is always
better than to be unjust?

  I should wish really to persuade you, I replied, if I could.

  Then you certainly have not succeeded. Let me ask you
now: How would you arrange goods--are there not some
which we welcome for their own sakes, and independently of
their consequences, as, for example, harmless pleasures and
enjoyments, which delight us at the time, although nothing
follows from them?

  I agree in thinking that there is such a class, I replied.

  Is there not also a second class of goods, such as knowledge,
sight, health, which are desirable not only in themselves, but
also for their results?

  Certainly, I said.

  And would you not recognize a third class, such as gym-
nastic, and the care of the sick, and the physician's art; also
the various ways of money-making--these do us good but we
regard them as disagreeable; and no one would choose them
for their own sakes, but only for the sake of some reward or
result which flows from them?

  There is, I said, this third class also. But why do you ask?

  Because I want to know in which of the three classes you
would place justice?

  In the highest class, I replied--among those goods which
he who would be happy desires both for their own sake and
for the sake of their results.

  Then the many are of another mind; they think that justice
is to be reckoned in the troublesome class, among goods which
are to be pursued for the sake of rewards and of reputation,
but in themselves are disagreeable and rather to be avoided.

  I know, I said, that this is their manner of thinking, and that
this was the thesis which Thrasymachus was maintaining just
now, when he censured justice and praised injustice. But I am
too stupid to be convinced by him.

  I wish, he said, that you would hear me as well as him, and
then I shall see whether you and I agree. For Thrasymachus
seems to me, like a snake, to have been charmed by your voice
sooner than he ought to have been; but to my mind the nature
of justice and injustice has not yet been made clear. Setting
aside their rewards and results, I want to know what they are
in themselves, and how they inwardly work in the soul. If
you please, then, I will revive the argument of Thrasymachus.
And first I will speak of the nature and origin of justice accord-
ing to the common view of them. Secondly, I will show that
all men who practise justice do so against their will, of neces-
sity, but not as a good. And thirdly, I will argue that there
is reason in this view, for the life of the unjust is after all better
far than the life of the just--if what they say is true, Socrates,
since I myself am not of their opinion. But still I acknowledge
that I am perplexed when I hear the voices of Thrasymachus
and myriads of others dinning in my ears; and, on the other
hand, I have never yet heard the superiority of justice to injus-
tice maintained by anyone in a satisfactory way. I want to hear
justice praised in respect of itself; then I shall be satisfied, and
you are the person from whom I think that I am most likely to
hear this; and therefore I will praise the unjust life to the ut-
most of my power, and my manner of speaking will indicate the
manner in which I desire to hear you too praising justice and
censuring injustice. Will you say whether you approve of my
proposal?

  Indeed I do; nor can I imagine any theme about which a
man of sense would oftener wish to converse.

  I am delighted, he replied, to hear you say so, and shall begin
by speaking, as I proposed, of the nature and origin of justice.

  They say that to do injustice is, by nature, good; to suffer
injustice, evil; but that the evil is greater than the good. And
so when men have both done and suffered injustice and have
had experience of both, not being able to avoid the one and
obtain the other, they think that they had better agree among
themselves to have neither; hence there arise laws and mutual
covenants; and that which is ordained by law is termed by them
lawful and just. This they affirm to be the origin and nature
of justice; it is a mean or compromise, between the best of all,
which is to do injustice and not be punished, and the worst
of all, which is to suffer injustice without the power of retalia-
tion; and justice, being at a middle point between the two, is
tolerated not as a good, but as the lesser evil, and honored by
reason of the inability of men to do injustice. For no man
who is worthy to be called a man would ever submit to such
an agreement if he were able to resist; he would be mad if he
did. Such is the received account, Socrates, of the nature and
origin of justice.

  Now that those who practise justice do so involuntarily and
because they have not the power to be unjust will best appear if
we imagine something of this kind: having given both to the
just and the unjust power to do what they will, let us watch
and see whither desire will lead them; then we shall discover
in the very act the just and unjust man to be proceeding along
the same road, following their interest, which all natures deem
to be their good, and are only diverted into the path of justice
by the force of law. The liberty which we are supposing may
be most completely given to them in the form of such a power
as is said to have been possessed by Gyges, the ancestor of Croe-
sus the Lydian. According to the tradition, Gyges was a
shepherd in the service of the King of Lydia; there was a great
storm, and an earthquake made an opening in the earth at the
place where he was feeding his flock. Amazed at the sight, he
descended into the opening, where, among other marvels, he
beheld a hollow brazen horse, having doors, at which he, stoop-
ing and looking in, saw a dead body of stature, as appeared to
him, more than human and having nothing on but a gold ring;
this he took from the finger of the dead and reascended. Now
the shepherds met together, according to custom, that they
might send their monthly report about the flocks to the King;
into their assembly he came having the ring on his finger, and
as he was sitting among them he chanced to turn the collet of
the ring inside his hand, when instantly he became invisible
to the rest of the company and they began to speak of him as if
he were no longer present. He was astonished at this, and
again touching the ring he turned the collet outward and re-
appeared; he made several trials of the ring, and always with
the same result--when he turned the collet inward he became
invisible, when outward he reappeared. Whereupon he con-
trived to be chosen one of the messengers who were sent to the
court; where as soon as he arrived he seduced the Queen, and
with her help conspired against the King and slew him and took
the kingdom. Suppose now that there were two such magic
rings, and the just put on one of them and the unjust the other;
no man can be imagined to be of such an iron nature that he
would stand fast in justice. No man would keep his hands
off what was not his own when he could safely take what he
liked out of the market, or go into houses and lie with anyone
at his pleasure, or kill or release from prison whom he would,
and in all respects be like a god among men. Then the actions
of the just would be as the actions of the unjust; they would
both come at last to the same point. And this we may truly
affirm to be a great proof that a man is just, not willingly or
because he thinks that justice is any good to him individually,
but of necessity, for wherever anyone thinks that he can safely
be unjust, there he is unjust. For all men believe in their
hearts that injustice is far more profitable to the individual
than justice, and he who argues as I have been supposing, will
say that they are right. If you could imagine anyone obtaining
this power of becoming invisible, and never doing any wrong
or touching what was another's, he would be thought by the
lookers-on to be a most wretched idiot, although they would
praise him to one another's faces, and keep up appearances with
one another from a fear that they too might suffer injustice.
Enough of this.

  Now, if we are to form a real judgment of the life of the
just and unjust, we must isolate them; there is no other way;
and how is the isolation to be effected? I answer: Let the
unjust man be entirely unjust, and the just man entirely just;
nothing is to be taken away from either of them, and both are
to be perfectly furnished for the work of their respective lives.
First, let the unjust be like other distinguished masters of craft;
like the skilful pilot or physician, who knows intuitively his
own powers and keeps within their limits, and who, if he fails
at any point, is able to recover himself. So let the unjust make
his unjust attempts in the right way, and lie hidden if he means
to be great in his injustice (he who is found out is nobody):
for the highest reach of injustice is, to be deemed just when
you are not. Therefore I say that in the perfectly unjust man
we must assume the most perfect injustice; there is to be no
deduction, but we must allow him, while doing the most unjust
acts, to have acquired the greatest reputation for justice. If
he have taken a false step he must be able to recover himself;
he must be one who can speak with effect, if any of his deeds
come to light, and who can force his way where force is re-
quired by his courage and strength, and command of money
and friends. And at his side let us place the just man in his
nobleness and simplicity, wishing, as AEschylus says, to be and
not to seem good. There must be no seeming, for if he seem
to be just he will be honored and rewarded, and then we shall
not know whether he is just for the sake of justice or for the
sake of honor and rewards; therefore, let him be clothed in jus-
tice only, and have no other covering; and he must be imagined
in a state of life the opposite of the former. Let him be the best
of men, and let him be thought the worst; then he will have
been put to the proof; and we shall see whether he will be
affected by the fear of infamy and its consequences. And let
him continue thus to the hour of death; being just and seeming
to be unjust. When both have reached the uttermost extreme,
the one of justice and the other of injustice, let judgment be
given which of them is the happier of the two.

  Heavens! my dear Glaucon, I said, how energetically you
polish them up for the decision, first one and then the other,
as if they were two statues.

  I do my best, he said. And now that we know what they
are like there is no difficulty in tracing out the sort of life which
awaits either of them. This I will proceed to describe; but as
you may think the description a little too coarse, I ask you to
suppose, Socrates, that the words which follow are not mine.
Let me put them into the mouths of the eulogists of injustice:
They will tell you that the just man who is thought unjust will
be scourged, racked, bound--will have his eyes burnt out; and,
at last, after suffering every kind of evil, he will be impaled.
Then he will understand that he ought to seem only, and not
to be, just; the words of AEschylus may be more truly spoken
of the unjust than of the just. For the unjust is pursuing a
reality; he does not live with a view to appearances--he wants
to be really unjust and not to seem only--

  "His mind has a soil deep and fertile,
   Out of which spring his prudent counsels."

In the first place, he is thought just, and therefore bears rule
in the city; he can marry whom he will, and give in marriage
to whom he will; also he can trade and deal where he likes, and
always to his own advantage, because he has no misgivings
about injustice; and at every contest, whether in public or pri-
vate, he gets the better of his antagonists, and gains at their
expense, and is rich, and out of his gains he can benefit his
friends, and harm his enemies; moreover, he can offer sacri-
fices, and dedicate gifts to the gods abundantly and magnifi-
cently, and can honor the gods or any man whom he wants to
honor in a far better style than the just, and therefore he is
likely to be dearer than they are to the gods. And thus, Soc-
rates, gods and men are said to unite in making the life of the
unjust better than the life of the just.

  I was going to say something in answer to Glaucon, when
Adeimantus, his brother, interposed: Socrates, he said, you
do not suppose that there is nothing more to be urged?

  Why, what else is there? I answered.

  The strongest point of all has not been even mentioned, he
replied.

  Well, then, according to the proverb, "Let brother help
brother"--if he fails in any part, do you assist him; although
I must confess that Glaucon has already said quite enough to
lay me in the dust, and take from me the power of helping
justice.

  Nonsense, he replied. But let me add something more:
There is another side to Glaucon's argument about the praise
and censure of justice and injustice, which is equally required
in order to bring out what I believe to be his meaning. Parents
and tutors are always telling their sons and their wards that
they are to be just; but why? not for the sake of justice, but
for the sake of character and reputation; in the hope of obtain-
ing for him who is reputed just some of those offices, marriages,
and the like which Glaucon has enumerated among the ad-
vantages accruing to the unjust from the reputation of justice.
More, however, is made of appearances by this class of persons
than by the others; for they throw in the good opinion of the
gods, and will tell you of a shower of benefits which the heavens,
as they say, rain upon the pious; and this accords with the tes-
timony of the noble Hesiod and Homer, the first of whom says
that the gods make the oaks of the just--

  "To bear acorns at their summit, and bees in the middle;
   And the sheep are bowed down with the weight of their fleeces,"

and many other blessings of a like kind are provided for them.
And Homer has a very similar strain; for he speaks of one
whose fame is

  "As the fame of some blameless king who, like a god,
   Maintains justice; to whom the black earth brings forth
   Wheat and barley, whose trees are bowed with fruit,
   And his sheep never fail to bear, and the sea gives him fish."

Still grander are the gifts of heaven which Musaeus and his
son vouchsafe to the just; they take them down into the world
below, where they have the saints lying on couches at a feast,
everlastingly drunk, crowned with garlands; their idea seems
to be that an immortality of drunkenness is the highest meed
of virtue. Some extend their rewards yet further; the pos-
terity, as they say, of the faithful and just shall survive to the
third and fourth generation. This is the style in which they
praise justice. But about the wicked there is another strain;
they bury them in a slough in Hades, and make them carry
water in a sieve; also while they are yet living they bring them
to infamy, and inflict upon them the punishments which Glau-
con described as the portion of the just who are reputed to be
unjust; nothing else does their invention supply. Such is their
manner of praising the one and censuring the other.

  Once more, Socrates, I will ask you to consider another way
of speaking about justice and injustice, which is not confined
to the poets, but is found in prose writers. The universal voice
of mankind is always declaring that justice and virtue are
honorable, but grievous and toilsome; and that the pleasures
of vice and injustice are easy of attainment, and are only cen-
sured by law and opinion. They say also that honesty is for
the most part less profitable than dishonesty; and they are quite
ready to call wicked men happy, and to honor them both in pub-
lic and private when they are rich or in any other way influen-
tial, while they despise and overlook those who may be weak
and poor, even though acknowledging them to be better than
the others. But most extraordinary of all is their mode of
speaking about virtue and the gods: they say that the gods ap-
portion calamity and misery to many good men, and good and
happiness to the wicked. And mendicant prophets go to rich
men's doors and persuade them that they have a power com-
mitted to them by the gods of making an atonement for a man's
own or his ancestor's sins by sacrifices or charms, with rejoic-
ings and feasts; and they promise to harm an enemy, whether
just or unjust, at a small cost; with magic arts and incantations
binding heaven, as they say, to execute their will. And the
poets are the authorities to whom they appeal, now smoothing
the path of vice with the words of Hesiod:

  "Vice may be had in abundance without trouble; the way is smooth
   and her dwelling-place is near. But before virtue the gods have set toil,"

and a tedious and uphill road: then citing Homer as a witness
that the gods may be influenced by men; for he also says:

  "The gods, too, may be turned from their purpose; and men pray to
   them and avert their wrath by sacrifices and soothing entreaties, and by
   libations and the odor of fat, when they have sinned and trangressed."

And they produce a host of books written by Musaeus and Or-
pheus, who were children of the Moon and the muses--that is
what they say--according to which they perform their ritual,
and persuade not only individuals, but whole cities, that expia-
tions and atonements for sin may be made by sacrifices and
amusements which fill a vacant hour, and are equally at the
service of the living and the dead; the latter sort they call mys-
teries, and they redeem us from the pains of hell, but if we
neglect them no one knows what awaits us.

  He proceeded: And now when the young hear all this said
about virtue and vice, and the way in which gods and men re-
gard them, how are their minds likely to be affected, my dear
Socrates--those of them, I mean, who are quick-witted, and,
like bees on the wing, light on every flower, and from all that
they hear are prone to draw conclusions as to what manner of
persons they should be and in what way they should walk if
they would make the best of life? Probably the youth will say
to himself in the words of Pindar:

  "Can I by justice or by crooked ways of deceit ascend a loftier tower
   which may be a fortress to me all my days?"

For what men say is that, if I am really just and am not also
thought just, profit there is none, but the pain and loss on the
other hand are unmistakable. But if, though unjust, I acquire
the reputation of justice, a heavenly life is promised to me.
Since then, as philosophers prove, appearance tyrannizes over
truth and is lord of happiness, to appearance I must devote
myself. I will describe around me a picture and shadow of
virtue to be the vestibule and exterior of my house; behind I
will trail the subtle and crafty fox, as Archilochus, greatest of
sages, recommends. But I hear someone exclaiming that the
concealment of wickedness is often difficult; to which I answer,
Nothing great is easy. Nevertheless, the argument indicates
this, if we would be happy, to be the path along which we
should proceed. With a view to concealment we will establish
secret brotherhoods and political clubs. And there are profes-
sors of rhetoric who teach the art of persuading courts and
assemblies; and so, partly by persuasion and partly by force,
I shall make unlawful gains and not be punished. Still I hear
a voice saying that the gods cannot be deceived, neither can
they be compelled. But what if there are no gods? or, suppose
them to have no care of human things--why in either case
should we mind about concealment? And even if there are
gods, and they do care about us, yet we know of them only
from tradition and the genealogies of the poets; and these are
the very persons who say that they may be influenced and
turned by "sacrifices and soothing entreaties and by offerings."
Let us be consistent, then, and believe both or neither. If the
poets speak truly, why, then, we had better be unjust, and offer
of the fruits of injustice; for if we are just, although we may
escape the vengeance of heaven, we shall lose the gains of in-
justice; but, if we are unjust, we shall keep the gains, and by
our sinning and praying, and praying and sinning, the gods
will be propitiated, and we shall not be punished. "But there
is a world below in which either we or our posterity will suffer
for our unjust deeds." Yes, my friend, will be the reflection,
but there are mysteries and atoning deities, and these have
great power. That is what mighty cities declare; and the chil-
dren of the gods, who were their poets and prophets, bear a like
testimony.

  On what principle, then, shall we any longer choose justice
rather than the worst injustice? when, if we only unite the lat-
ter with a deceitful regard to appearances, we shall fare to our
mind both with gods and men, in life and after death, as the
most numerous and the highest authorities tell us. Knowing
all this, Socrates, how can a man who has any superiority of
mind or person or rank or wealth, be willing to honor justice;
or indeed to refrain from laughing when he hears justice
praised? And even if there should be someone who is able to
disprove the truth of my words, and who is satisfied that justice
is best, still he is not angry with the unjust, but is very ready
to forgive them, because he also knows that men are not just
of their own free will; unless, peradventure, there be someone
whom the divinity within him may have inspired with a hatred
of injustice, or who has attained knowledge of the truth--but
no other man. He only blames injustice, who, owing to cow-
ardice or age or some weakness, has not the power of being
unjust. And this is proved by the fact that when he obtains
the power, he immediately becomes unjust as far as he can be.

  The cause of all this, Socrates, was indicated by us at the
beginning of the argument, when my brother and I told you
how astonished we were to find that of all the professing pan-
egyrists of justice--beginning with the ancient heroes of whom
any memorial has been preserved to us, and ending with the
men of our own time--no one has ever blamed injustice or
praised justice except with a view to the glories, honors, and
benefits which flow from them. No one has ever adequately de-
scribed either in verse or prose the true essential nature of either
of them abiding in the soul, and invisible to any human or divine
eye; or shown that of all the things of a man's soul which he has
within him, justice is the greatest good, and injustice the great-
est evil. Had this been the universal strain, had you sought to
persuade us of this from our youth upward, we should not have
been on the watch to keep one another from doing wrong, but
everyone would have been his own watchman, because afraid,
if he did wrong, of harboring in himself the greatest of evils.
I dare say that Thrasymachus and others would seriously hold
the language which I have been merely repeating, and words
even stronger than these about justice and injustice, grossly,
as I conceive, perverting their true nature. But I speak in this
vehement manner, as I must frankly confess to you, because
I want to hear from you the opposite side; and I would ask you
to show not only the superiority which justice has over injus-
tice, but what effect they have on the possessor of them which
makes the one to be a good and the other an evil to him. And
please, as Glaucon requested of you, to exclude reputations; for
unless you take away from each of them his true reputation and
add on the false, we shall say that you do not praise justice, but
the appearance of it; we shall think that you are only exhorting
us to keep injustice dark, and that you really agree with Thra-
symachus in thinking that justice is another's good and the in-
terest of the stronger, and that injustice is a man's own profit
and interest, though injurious to the weaker. Now as you
have admitted that justice is one of that highest class of goods
which are desired, indeed, for their results, but in a far greater
degree for their own sakes--like sight or hearing or knowledge
or health, or any other real and natural and not merely conven-
tional good--I would ask you in your praise of justice to regard
one point only: I mean the essential good and evil which justice
and injustice work in the possessors of them. Let others praise
justice and censure injustice, magnifying the rewards and
honors of the one and abusing the other; that is a manner of
arguing which, coming from them, I am ready to tolerate, but
from you who have spent your whole life in the consideration
of this question, unless I hear the contrary from your own lips,
I expect something better. And therefore, I say, not only
prove to us that justice is better than injustice, but show what
they either of them do to the possessor of them, which makes
the one to be a good and the other an evil, whether seen or un-
seen by gods and men.

  I had always admired the genius of Glaucon and Adeiman-
tus, but on hearing these words I was quite delighted, and said:
Sons of an illustrious father, that was not a bad beginning of
the elegiac verses which the admirer of Glaucon made in honor
of you after you had distinguished yourselves at the battle of
Megara:

  "Sons of Ariston," he sang, "divine offspring of an illustrious hero."

The epithet is very appropriate, for there is something truly
divine in being able to argue as you have done for the supe-
riority of injustice, and remaining unconvinced by your own
arguments. And I do believe that you are not convinced--
this I infer from your general character, for had I judged only
from your speeches I should have mistrusted you. But now,
the greater my confidence in you, the greater is my difficulty in
knowing what to say. For I am in a strait between two; on
the one hand I feel that I am unequal to the task; and my ina-
bility is brought home to me by the fact that you were not sat-
isfied with the answer which I made to Thrasymachus, proving,
as I thought, the superiority which justice has over injustice.
And yet I cannot refuse to help, while breath and speech remain
to me; I am afraid that there would be an impiety in being
present when justice is evil spoken of and not lifting up a hand
in her defence. And therefore I had best give such help as I
can.

  Glaucon and the rest entreated me by all means not to let
the question drop, but to proceed in the investigation. They
wanted to arrive at the truth, first, about the nature of justice
and injustice, and secondly, about their relative advantages.
I told them, what I really thought, that the inquiry would be
of a serious nature, and would require very good eyes. Seeing
then, I said, that we are no great wits, I think that we had bet-
ter adopt a method which I may illustrate thus; suppose that
a short-sighted person had been asked by someone to read small
letters from a distance; and it occurred to someone else that
they might be found in another place which was larger and in
which the letters were larger--if they were the same and he
could read the larger letters first, and then proceed to the lesser
--this would have been thought a rare piece of good-fortune.

  Very true, said Adeimantus; but how does the illustration
apply to our inquiry?

  I will tell you, I replied; justice, which is the subject of our
inquiry, is, as you know, sometimes spoken of as the virtue of
an individual, and sometimes as the virtue of a State.

  True, he replied.

  And is not a State larger than an individual?

  It is.

  Then in the larger the quantity of justice is likely to be larger
and more easily discernible. I propose therefore that we in-
quire into the nature of justice and injustice, first as they appear
in the State, and secondly in the individual, proceeding from
the greater to the lesser and comparing them.

  That, he said, is an excellent proposal.

  And if we imagine the State in process of creation, we shall
see the justice and injustice of the State in process of creation
also.

  I dare say.

  When the State is completed there may be a hope that the
object of our search will be more easily discovered.

  Yes, far more easily.

  But ought we to attempt to construct one? I said; for to do
so, as I am inclined to think, will be a very serious task. Re-
flect therefore.

  I have reflected, said Adeimantus, and am anxious that you
should proceed.

  A State, I said, arises, as I conceive, out of the needs of man-
kind; no one is self-sufficing, but all of us have many wants.
Can any other origin of a State be imagined?

  There can be no other.

  Then, as we have many wants, and many persons are needed
to supply them, one takes a helper for one purpose and another
for another; and when these partners and helpers are gathered
together in one habitation the body of inhabitants is termed a
State.

  True, he said.

  And they exchange with one another, and one gives, and an-
other receives, under the idea that the exchange will be for
their good.

  Very true.

  Then, I said, let us begin and create in idea a State; and yet
the true creator is necessity, who is the mother of our invention.

  Of course, he replied.

  Now the first and greatest of necessities is food, which is
the condition of life and existence.

  Certainly.

  The second is a dwelling, and the third clothing and the like.

  True.

  And now let us see how our city will be able to supply this
great demand: We may suppose that one man is a husband-
man, another a builder, someone else a weaver--shall we add
to them a shoemaker, or perhaps some other purveyor to our
bodily wants?

  Quite right.

  The barest notion of a State must include four or five men.

  Clearly.

  And how will they proceed? Will each bring the result of
his labors into a common stock?--the individual husbandman,
for example, producing for four, and laboring four times as
long and as much as he need in the provision of food with
which he supplies others as well as himself; or will he have
nothing to do with others and not be at the trouble of producing
for them, but provide for himself alone a fourth of the food in
a fourth of the time, and in the remaining three-fourths of his
time be employed in making a house or a coat or a pair of shoes,
having no partnership with others, but supplying himself all his
own wants?

  Adeimantus thought that he should aim at producing food
only and not at producing everything.

  Probably, I replied, that would be the better way; and when
I hear you say this, I am myself reminded that we are not all
alike; there are diversities of natures among us which are
adapted to different occupations.

  Very true.

  And will you have a work better done when the workman
has many occupations, or when he has only one?

  When he has only one.

  Further, there can be no doubt that a work is spoilt when
not done at the right time?

  No doubt.

  For business is not disposed to wait until the doer of the
business is at leisure; but the doer must follow up what he is
doing, and make the business his first object.

  He must.

  And if so, we must infer that all things are produced more
plentifully and easily and of a better quality when one man does
one thing which is natural to him and does it at the right time,
and leaves other things.
Undoubtedly.

  Then more than four citizens will be required; for the hus-
bandman will not make his own plough or mattock, or other
implements of agriculture, if they are to be good for anything.
Neither will the builder make his tools--and he, too, needs
many; and in like manner the weaver and shoemaker.

  True.

  Then carpenters and smiths and many other artisans will be
sharers in our little State, which is already beginning to grow?

  True.

  Yet even if we add neatherds, shepherds, and other herds-
men, in order that our husbandmen may have oxen to plough
with, and builders as well as husbandmen may have draught
cattle, and curriers and weavers fleeces and hides--still our
State will not be very large.

  That is true; yet neither will it be a very small State which
contains all these.

  Then, again, there is the situation of the city--to find a place
where nothing need be imported is well-nigh impossible.

  Impossible.

  Then there must be another class of citizens who will bring
the required supply from another city?

  There must.

  But if the trader goes empty-handed, having nothing which
they require who would supply his need, he will come back
empty-handed.

  That is certain.

  And therefore what they produce at home must be not only
enough for themselves, but such both in quantity and quality
as to accommodate those from whom their wants are supplied.

  Very true.

  Then more husbandmen and more artisans will be required?

  They will.

  Not to mention the importers and exporters, who are called
merchants?

  Yes.

  Then we shall want merchants?

  We shall.

  And if merchandise is to be carried over the sea, skilful
sailors will also be needed, and in considerable numbers?

  Yes, in considerable numbers.

  Then, again, within the city, how will they exchange their
productions? To secure such an exchange was, as you will
remember, one of our principal objects when we formed them
into a society and constituted a State.

  Clearly they will buy and sell.

  Then they will need a market-place, and a money-token for
purposes of exchange.

  Certainly.

  Suppose now that a husbandman or an artisan brings some
production to market, and he comes at a time when there is no
one to exchange with him--is he to leave his calling and sit idle
in the market-place?

  Not at all; he will find people there who, seeing the want,
undertake the office of salesmen. In well-ordered States they
are commonly those who are the weakest in bodily strength,
and therefore of little use for any other purpose; their duty is
to be in the market, and to give money in exchange for goods
to those who desire to sell, and to take money from those who
desire to buy.

  This want, then, creates a class of retail-traders in our State.
Is not "retailer" the term which is applied to those who sit in
the market-place engaged in buying and selling, while those
who wander from one city to another are called merchants?

  Yes, he said.

  And there is another class of servants, who are intellectually
hardly on the level of companionship; still they have plenty of
bodily strength for labor, which accordingly they sell, and are
called, if I do not mistake, hirelings, "hire" being the name
which is given to the price of their labor.

  True.

  Then hirelings will help to make up our population?

  Yes.

  And now, Adeimantus, is our State matured and perfected?

  I think so.

  Where, then, is justice, and where is injustice, and in what
part of the State did they spring up?

  Probably in the dealings of these citizens with one another.
I cannot imagine that they are more likely to be found any-
where else.

  I dare say that you are right in your suggestion, I said; we
had better think the matter out, and not shrink from the
inquiry.

  Let us then consider, first of all, what will be their way of
life, now that we have thus established them. Will they not
produce corn and wine and clothes and shoes, and build houses
for themselves? And when they are housed, they will work,
in summer, commonly, stripped and barefoot, but in winter
substantially clothed and shod. They will feed on barley-meal
and flour of wheat, baking and kneading them, making noble
cakes and loaves; these they will serve up on a mat of reeds
or on clean leaves, themselves reclining the while upon beds
strewn with yew or myrtle. And they and their children will
feast, drinking of the wine which they have made, wearing
garlands on their heads, and hymning the praises of the gods,
in happy converse with one another. And they will take care
that their families do not exceed their means; having an eye
to poverty or war.

  But, said Glaucon, interposing, you have not given them
a relish to their meal.

  True, I replied, I had forgotten; of course they must have
a relish--salt and olives and cheese--and they will boil roots
and herbs such as country people prepare; for a dessert we
shall give them figs and peas and beans; and they will roast
myrtle-berries and acorns at the fire, drinking in moderation.
And with such a diet they may be expected to live in peace and
health to a good old age, and bequeath a similar life to their
children after them.

  Yes, Socrates, he said, and if you were providing for a city
of pigs, how else would you feed the beasts?

  But what would you have, Glaucon? I replied.

  Why, he said, you should give them the ordinary conven-
iences of life. People who are to be comfortable are accus-
tomed to lie on sofas, and dine off tables, and they should have
sauces and sweets in the modern style.

  Yes, I said, now I understand: the question which you would
have me consider is, not only how a State, but how a luxurious
State is created; and possibly there is no harm in this, for in
such a State we shall be more likely to see how justice and in-
justice originate. In my opinion the true and healthy consti-
tution of the State is the one which I have described. But if
you wish also to see a State at fever-heat, I have no objection.
For I suspect that many will not be satisfied with the simpler
way of life. They will be for adding sofas and tables and other
furniture; also dainties and perfumes and incense and courte-
sans and cakes, all these not of one sort only, but in every
variety. We must go beyond the necessaries of which I was
at first speaking, such as houses and clothes and shoes; the arts
of the painter and the embroiderer will have to be set in motion,
and gold and ivory and all sorts of materials must be procured.

  True, he said.

  Then we must enlarge our borders; for the original healthy
State is no longer sufficient. Now will the city have to fill and
swell with a multitude of callings which are not required by
any natural want; such as the whole tribe of hunters and actors,
of whom one large class have to do with forms and colors;
another will be the votaries of music--poets and their attendant
train of rhapsodists, players, dancers, contractors; also makers
of divers kinds of articles, including women's dresses. And
we shall want more servants. Will not tutors be also in re-
quest, and nurses wet and dry, tirewomen and barbers, as well
as confectioners and cooks; and swineherds, too, who were not
needed and therefore had no place in the former edition of our
State, but are needed now? They must not be forgotten: and
there will be animals of many other kinds, if people eat them.

  Certainly.

  And living in this way we shall have much greater need of
physicians than before?

  Much greater.

  And the country which was enough to support the original
inhabitants will be too small now, and not enough?

  Quite true.

  Then a slice of our neighbors' land will be wanted by us for
pasture and tillage, and they will want a slice of ours, if, like
ourselves, they exceed the limit of necessity, and give them-
selves up to the unlimited accumulation of wealth?

  That, Socrates, will be inevitable.

  And so we shall go to war, Glaucon. Shall we not?

  Most certainly, he replied.
Then, without determining as yet whether war does good or
harm, thus much we may affirm, that now we have discovered
war to be derived from causes which are also the causes of
almost all the evils in States, private as well as public.

  Undoubtedly.

  And our State must once more enlarge; and this time the
enlargement will be nothing short of a whole army, which will
have to go out and fight with the invaders for all that we have,
as well as for the things and persons whom we were describing
above.

  Why? he said; are they not capable of defending themselves?

  No, I said; not if we were right in the principle which was
acknowledged by all of us when we were framing the State.
The principle, as you will remember, was that one man cannot
practise many arts with success.

  Very true, he said.

  But is not war an art?

  Certainly.

  And an art requiring as much attention as shoemaking?

  Quite true.

  And the shoemaker was not allowed by us to be a husband-
man, or a weaver, or a builder--in order that we might have
our shoes well made; but to him and to every other worker
was assigned one work for which he was by nature fitted, and
at that he was to continue working all his life long and at no
other; he was not to let opportunities slip, and then he would
become a good workman. Now nothing can be more impor-
tant than that the work of a soldier should be well done. But
is war an art so easily acquired that a man may be a warrior
who is also a husbandman, or shoemaker, or other artisan; al-
though no one in the world would be a good dice or draught
player who merely took up the game as a recreation, and had
not from his earliest years devoted himself to this and nothing
else?

  No tools will make a man a skilled workman or master
of defence, nor be of any use to him who has not learned how to
handle them, and has never bestowed any attention upon them.
How, then, will he who takes up a shield or other implement
of war become a good fighter all in a day, whether with heavy-
armed or any other kind of troops?

  Yes, he said, the tools which would teach men their own use
would be beyond price.

  And the higher the duties of the guardian, I said, the more
time and skill and art and application will be needed by him?

  No doubt, he replied.

  Will he not also require natural aptitude for his calling?

  Certainly.

  Then it will be our duty to select, if we can, natures which
are fitted for the task of guarding the city?

  It will.

  And the selection will be no easy matter, I said; but we must
be brave and do our best.

  We must.

  Is not the noble youth very like a well-bred dog in respect
of guarding and watching?

  What do you mean?

  I mean that both of them ought to be quick to see, and swift
to overtake the enemy when they see him; and strong too if,
when they have caught him, they have to fight with him.

  All these qualities, he replied, will certainly be required by
them.

  Well, and your guardian must be brave if he is to fight well?

  Certainly.

  And is he likely to be brave who has no spirit, whether horse
or dog or any other animal? Have you never observed how
invincible and unconquerable is spirit and how the presence of
it makes the soul of any creature to be absolutely fearless and
indomitable?

  I have.

  Then now we have a clear notion of the bodily qualities
which are required in the guardian.

  True.

  And also of the mental ones; his soul is to be full of spirit?

  Yes.

  But are not these spirited natures apt to be savage with one
another, and with everybody else?

  A difficulty by no means easy to overcome, he replied.

  Whereas, I said, they ought to be dangerous to their enemies,
and gentle to their friends; if not, they will destroy themselves
without waiting for their enemies to destroy them.

  True, he said.

  What is to be done, then? I said; how shall we find a gentle
nature which has also a great spirit, for the one is the contra-
diction of the other?

  True.

  He will not be a good guardian who is wanting in either of
these two qualities; and yet the combination of them appears
to be impossible; and hence we must infer that to be a good
guardian is impossible.

  I am afraid that what you say is true, he replied.

  Here feeling perplexed I began to think over what had pre-
ceded. My friend, I said, no wonder that we are in a perplex-
ity; for we have lost sight of the image which we had before
us.

  What do you mean? he said.

  I mean to say that there do exist natures gifted with those
opposite qualities.

  And where do you find them?

  Many animals, I replied, furnish examples of them; our
friend the dog is a very good one: you know that well-bred dogs
are perfectly gentle to their familiars and acquaintances, and
the reverse to strangers.

  Yes, I know.

  Then there is nothing impossible or out of the order of
nature in our finding a guardian who has a similar combination
of qualities?

  Certainly not.

  Would not he who is fitted to be a guardian, besides the spir-
ited nature, need to have the qualities of a philosopher?

  I do not apprehend your meaning.

  The trait of which I am speaking, I replied, may be also seen
in the dog, and is remarkable in the animal.

  What trait?

  Why, a dog, whenever he sees a stranger, is angry; when an
acquaintance, he welcomes him, although the one has never
done him any harm, nor the other any good. Did this never
strike you as curious?

  The matter never struck me before; but I quite recognize the
truth of your remark.

  And surely this instinct of the dog is very charming; your
dog is a true philosopher.

  Why?

  Why, because he distinguishes the face of a friend and of
an enemy only by the criterion of knowing and not knowing.
And must not an animal be a lover of learning who determines
what he likes and dislikes by the test of knowledge and ignor-
ance?

  Most assuredly.

  And is not the love of learning the love of wisdom, which
is philosophy?

  They are the same, he replied.

  And may we not say confidently of man also, that he who
is likely to be gentle to his friends and acquaintances, must
by nature be a lover of wisdom and knowledge?

  That we may safely affirm.

  Then he who is to be a really good and noble guardian of the
State will require to unite in himself philosophy and spirit and
swiftness and strength?

  Undoubtedly.

  Then we have found the desired natures; and now that we
have found them, how are they to be reared and educated? Is
not this an inquiry which may be expected to throw light on
the greater inquiry which is our final end--How do justice and
injustice grow up in States? for we do not want either to omit
what is to the point or to draw out the argument to an incon-
venient length.

  Adeimantus thought that the inquiry would be of great ser-
vice to us.

  Then, I said, my dear friend, the task must not be given up,
even if somewhat long.

  Certainly not.

  Come then, and let us pass a leisure hour in story-telling, and
our story shall be the education of our heroes.

  By all means.

  And what shall be their education? Can we find a better
than the traditional sort?--and this has two divisions, gym-
nastics for the body, and music for the soul.

  True.

  Shall we begin education with music, and go on to gymnas-
tics afterward?

  By all means.

  And when you speak of music, do you include literature or
not?

  I do.

  And literature may be either true or false?

  Yes.

  And the young should be trained in both kinds, and we be-
gin with the false?

  I do not understand your meaning, he said.

  You know, I said, that we begin by telling children stories
which, though not wholly destitute of truth, are in the main
fictitious; and these stories are told them when they are not
of an age to learn gymnastics.

  Very true.

  That was my meaning when I said that we must teach music
before gymnastics.

  Quite right, he said.

  You know also that the beginning is the most important part
of any work, especially in the case of a young and tender thing;
for that is the time at which the character is being formed and
the desired impression is more readily taken.

  Quite true.

  And shall we just carelessly allow children to hear any casual
tales which may be devised by casual persons, and to receive
into their minds ideas for the most part the very opposite of
those which we should wish them to have when they are
grown up?

  We cannot.

  Then the first thing will be to establish a censorship of the
writers of fiction, and let the censors receive any tale of fiction
which is good, and reject the bad; and we will desire mothers
and nurses to tell their children the authorized ones only. Let
them fashion the mind with such tales, even more fondly than
they mould the body with their hands; but most of those which
are now in use must be discarded.

  Of what tales are you speaking? he said.

  You may find a model of the lesser in the greater, I said; for
they are necessarily of the same type, and there is the same
spirit in both of them.

  Very likely, he replied; but I do not as yet know what you
would term the greater.

  Those, I said, which are narrated by Homer and Hesiod,
and the rest of the poets, who have ever been the great story-
tellers of mankind.

  But which stories do you mean, he said; and what fault do
you find with them?

  A fault which is most serious, I said; the fault of telling a
lie, and, what is more, a bad lie.

  But when is this fault committed?

  Whenever an erroneous representation is made of the nature
of gods and heroes--as when a painter paints a portrait not
having the shadow of a likeness to the original.

  Yes, he said, that sort of thing is certainly very blamable;
but what are the stories which you mean?

  First of all, I said, there was that greatest of all lies in high
places, which the poet told about Uranus, and which was a bad
lie too--I mean what Hesiod says that Uranus did, and how
Cronus retaliated on him. The doings of Cronus, and the
sufferings which in turn his son inflicted upon him, even if they
were true, ought certainly not to be lightly told to young and
thoughtless persons; if possible, they had better be buried in
silence. But if there is an absolute necessity for their mention,
a chosen few might hear them in a mystery, and they should
sacrifice not a common [Eleusinian] pig, but some huge and
unprocurable victim; and then the number of the hearers will
be very few indeed.

  Why, yes, said he, those stories are extremely objectionable.

  Yes, Adeimantus, they are stories not to be repeated in our
State; the young man should not be told that in committing
the worst of crimes he is far from doing anything outrageous;
and that even if he chastises his father when he does wrong,
in whatever manner, he will only be following the example of
the first and greatest among the gods.

  I entirely agree with you, he said; in my opinion those stories
are quite unfit to be repeated.

  Neither, if we mean our future guardians to regard the habit
of quarrelling among themselves as of all things the basest,
should any word be said to them of the wars in heaven, and
of the plots and fightings of the gods against one another, for
they are not true. No, we shall never mention the battles of
the giants, or let them be embroidered on garments; and we
shall be silent about the innumerable other quarrels of gods
and heroes with their friends and relatives. If they would
only believe us we would tell them that quarrelling is unholy,
and that never up to this time has there been any quarrel be-
tween citizens; this is what old men and old women should
begin by telling children; and when they grow up, the poets
also should be told to compose them in a similar spirit. But
the narrative of Hephaestus binding Here his mother, or how
on another occasion Zeus sent him flying for taking her part
when she was being beaten, and all the battles of the gods in
Homer--these tales must not be admitted into our State,
whether they are supposed to have an allegorical meaning or
not. For a young person cannot judge what is allegorical and
what is literal; anything that he receives into his mind at that
age is likely to become indelible and unalterable; and therefore
it is most important that the tales which the young first hear
should be models of virtuous thoughts.

  There you are right, he replied; but if anyone asks where
are such models to be found and of what tales are you speak-
ing--how shall we answer him?

  I said to him, You and I, Adeimantus, at this moment are not
poets, but founders of a State: now the founders of a State
ought to know the general forms in which poets should cast
their tales, and the limits which must be observed by them, but
to make the tales is not their business.

  Very true, he said; but what are these forms of theology
which you mean?

  Something of this kind, I replied: God is always to be rep-
resented as he truly is, whatever be the sort of poetry, epic, lyric,
or tragic, in which the representation is given.

  Right.

  And is he not truly good? and must he not be represented
as such?

  Certainly.

  And no good thing is hurtful?

  No, indeed.

  And that which is not hurtful hurts not?

  Certainly not.

  And that which hurts not does no evil?

  No.

  And can that which does no evil be a cause of evil?

  Impossible.

  And the good is advantageous?

  Yes.

  And therefore the cause of well-being?

  Yes.

  It follows, therefore, that the good is not the cause of all
things, but of the good only?

  Assuredly.

  Then God, if he be good, is not the author of all things, as
the many assert, but he is the cause of a few things only, and
not of most things that occur to men. For few are the goods
of human life, and many are the evils, and the good is to be
attributed to God alone; of the evils the causes are to be sought
elsewhere, and not in him.

  That appears to me to be most true, he said.

  Then we must not listen to Homer or to any other poet who
is guilty of the folly of saying that two casks

  "Lie at the threshold of Zeus, full of lots, one of good, the other of
   evil lots,"

and that he to whom Zeus gives a mixture of the two

  "Sometimes meets with evil fortune, at other times with good;"

but that he to whom is given the cup of unmingled ill,

  "Him wild hunger drives o'er the beauteous earth."

And again--

  "Zeus, who is the dispenser of good and evil to us."

And if anyone asserts that the violation of oaths and treaties,
which was really the work of Pandarus, was brought about
by Athene and Zeus, or that the strife and contention of the
gods were instigated by Themis and Zeus, he shall not have
our approval; neither will we allow our young men to hear the
words of AEschylus, that

  "God plants guilt among men when he desires utterly to destroy a house."

And if a poet writes of the sufferings of Niobe--the subject
of the tragedy in which these iambic verses occur--or of the
house of Pelops, or of the Trojan War or on any similar theme,
either we must not permit him to say that these are the works
of God, or if they are of God, he must devise some explanation
of them such as we are seeking: he must say that God did what
was just and right, and they were the better for being punished;
but that those who are punished are miserable, and that God is
the author of their misery--the poet is not to be permitted to
say; though he may say that the wicked are miserable because
they require to be punished, and are benefited by receiving pun-
ishment from God; but that God being good is the author of
evil to anyone is to be strenuously denied, and not to be said
or sung or heard in verse or prose by anyone whether old or
young in any well-ordered commonwealth. Such a fiction is
suicidal, ruinous, impious.

  I agree with you, he replied, and am ready to give my assent
to the law.

  Let this then be one of our rules and principles concerning
the gods, to which our poets and reciters will be expected to
conform--that God is not the author of all things, but of good
only.

  That will do, he said.

  And what do you think of a second principle? Shall I ask
you whether God is a magician, and of a nature to appear in-
sidiously now in one shape, and now in another--sometimes
himself changing and passing into many forms, sometimes de-
ceiving us with the semblance of such transformations; or is
he one and the same immutably fixed in his own proper image?

  I cannot answer you, he said, without more thought.

  Well, I said; but if we suppose a change in anything, that
change must be effected either by the thing itself or by some
other thing?

  Most certainly.

  And things which are at their best are also least liable to be
altered or discomposed; for example, when healthiest and
strongest, the human frame is least liable to be affected by
meats and drinks, and the plant which is in the fullest vigor also
suffers least from winds or the heat of the sun or any similar
causes.

  Of course.

  And will not the bravest and wisest soul be least confused
or deranged by any external influence?

  True.

  And the same principle, as I should suppose, applies to all
composite things--furniture, houses, garments: when good and
well made, they are least altered by time and circumstances.

  Very true.

  Then everything which is good, whether made by art or
nature, or both, is least liable to suffer change from without?

  True.

  But surely God and the things of God are in every way per-
fect?

  Of course they are.

  Then he can hardly be compelled by external influence to
take many shapes?

  He cannot.

  But may he not change and transform himself?

  Clearly, he said, that must be the case if he is changed at all.

  And will he then change himself for the better and fairer,
or for the worse and more unsightly?

  If he change at all he can only change for the worse, for we
cannot suppose him to be deficient either in virtue or beauty.

  Very true, Adeimantus; but then, would anyone, whether
God or man, desire to make himself worse?

  Impossible.

  Then it is impossible that God should ever be willing to
change; being, as is supposed, the fairest and best that is con-
ceivable, every God remains absolutely and forever in his own
form.

  That necessarily follows, he said, in my judgment.

  Then, I said, my dear friend, let none of the poets tell us
that

  "The gods, taking the disguise of strangers from other lands, walk up
   and down cities in all sorts of forms;"

and let no one slander Proteus and Thetis, neither let anyone,
either in tragedy or in any other kind of poetry, introduce Here
disguised in the likeness of a priestess asking an alms

  "For the life-giving daughters of Inachus the river of Argos;"

--let us have no more lies of that sort. Neither must we have
mothers under the influence of the poets scaring their children
with a bad version of these myths--telling how certain gods,
as they say, "Go about by night in the likeness of so many
strangers and in divers forms;" but let them take heed lest they
make cowards of their children, and at the same time speak
blasphemy against the gods.

  Heaven forbid, he said.

  But although the gods are themselves unchangeable, still by
witchcraft and deception they may make us think that they ap-
pear in various forms?

  Perhaps, he replied.

  Well, but can you imagine that God will be willing to lie,
whether in word or deed, or to put forth a phantom of himself?

  I cannot say, he replied.

  Do you not know, I said, that the true lie, if such an expres-
sion may be allowed, is hated of gods and men?

  What do you mean? he said.

  I mean that no one is willingly deceived in that which is the
truest and highest part of himself, or about the truest and
highest matters; there, above all, he is most afraid of a lie
having possession of him.

  Still, he said, I do not comprehend you.

  The reason is, I replied, that you attribute some profound
meaning to my words; but I am only saying that deception, or
being deceived or uninformed about the highest realities in the
highest part of themselves, which is the soul, and in that part
of them to have and to hold the lie, is what mankind least like;
--that, I say, is what they utterly detest.

  There is nothing more hateful to them.

  And, as I was just now remarking, this ignorance in the soul
of him who is deceived may be called the true lie; for the lie
in words is only a kind of imitation and shadowy image of a
previous affection of the soul, not pure unadulterated false-
hood. Am I not right?

  Perfectly right.

  The true lie is hated not only by the gods, but also by men?

  Yes.

  Whereas the lie in words is in certain cases useful and not
hateful; in dealing with enemies--that would be an instance;
or again, when those whom we call our friends in a fit of mad-
ness or illusion are going to do some harm, then it is useful and
is a sort of medicine or preventive; also in the tales of mythol-
ogy, of which we were just now speaking--because we do not
know the truth about ancient times, we make falsehood as much
like truth as we can, and so turn it to account.

  Very true, he said.

  But can any of these reasons apply to God? Can we sup-
pose that he is ignorant of antiquity, and therefore has recourse
to invention?

  That would be ridiculous, he said.

  Then the lying poet has no place in our idea of God?

  I should say not.

  Or perhaps he may tell a lie because he is afraid of enemies?

  That is inconceivable.

  But he may have friends who are senseless or mad?

  But no mad or senseless person can be a friend of God.

  Then no motive can be imagined why God should lie?

  None whatever.

  Then the superhuman, and divine, is absolutely incapable of
falsehood?

  Yes.

  Then is God perfectly simple and true both in word and
deed; he changes not; he deceives not, either by sign or word,
by dream or waking vision.

  Your thoughts, he said, are the reflection of my own.

  You agree with me then, I said, that this is the second type
or form in which we should write and speak about divine
things. The gods are not magicians who transform them-
selves, neither do they deceive mankind in any way.

  I grant that.

  Then, although we are admirers of Homer, we do not admire
the lying dream which Zeus sends to Agamemnon; neither will
we praise the verses of AEschylus in which Thetis says that
Apollo at her nuptials

  "was celebrating in song her fair progeny whose days were to be long,
   and to know no sickness. And when he had spoken of my lot as in all
   things blessed of heaven, he raised a note of triumph and cheered my soul.
   And I thought that the word of Phoebus, being divine and full of prophecy,
   would not fail. And now he himself who uttered the strain, he who was
   present at the banquet, and who said this--he it is who has slain my
   son."

  These are the kind of sentiments about the gods which will
arouse our anger; and he who utters them shall be refused a
chorus; neither shall we allow teachers to make use of them
in the instruction of the young, meaning, as we do, that our
guardians, as far as men can be, should be true worshippers
of the gods and like them.

  I entirely agree, he said, in these principles, and promise
to make them my laws.


                       BOOK III
                THE ARTS IN EDUCATION

(SOCRATES, ADEIMANTUS.)

  SUCH, then, I said, are our principles of theology--some
tales are to be told, and others are not to be told to our
disciples from their youth upward, if we mean them to
honor the gods and their parents, and to value friendship with
one another.

  Yes; and I think that our principles are right, he said.

  But if they are to be courageous, must they not learn other
lessons beside these, and lessons of such a kind as will take
away the fear of death? Can any man be courageous who
has the fear of death in him?

  Certainly not, he said.

  And can he be fearless of death, or will he choose death in
battle rather than defeat and slavery, who believes the world
below to be real and terrible?

  Impossible.

  Then we must assume a control over the narrators of this
class of tales as well as over the others, and beg them not sim-
ply to revile, but rather to commend the world below, intimat-
ing to them that their descriptions are untrue, and will do harm
to our future warriors.

  That will be our duty, he said.

  Then, I said, we shall have to obliterate many obnoxious
passages, beginning with the verses

  "I would rather be a serf on the land of a poor and portionless
   man than rule over all the dead who have come to naught."

We must also expunge the verse which tells us how Pluto
feared

  "Lest the mansions grim and squalid which the gods abhor should
   be seen both of mortals and immortals."

And again:

  "O heavens! verily in the house of Hades there is soul and ghostly
   form but no mind at all!"

Again of Tiresias:

  "[To him even after death did Persephone grant mind,] that he
   alone should be wise; but the other souls are flitting shades."

Again:

  "The soul flying from the limbs had gone to Hades, lamentng her
   fate, leaving manhood and youth."

Again:

  "And the soul, with shrilling cry, passed like smoke beneath the
   earth."

And,

  "As bats in hollow of mystic cavern, whenever any of them has
   dropped out of the string and falls from the rock, fly shrilling and
   cling to one another, so did they with shrilling cry hold together as
   they moved."

And we must beg Homer and the other poets not to be angry
if we strike out these and similar passages, not because they
are unpoetical, or unattractive to the popular ear, but because
the greater the poetical charm of them, the less are they meet
for the ears of boys and men who are meant to be free, and who
should fear slavery more than death.

  Undoubtedly.

  Also we shall have to reject all the terrible and appalling
names which describe the world below--Cocytus and Styx,
ghosts under the earth, and sapless shades, and any similar
words of which the very mention causes a shudder to pass
through the inmost soul of him who hears them. I do not say
that these horrible stories may not have a use of some kind;
but there is a danger that the nerves of our guardians may be
rendered too excitable and effeminate by them.

  There is a real danger, he said.

  Then we must have no more of them.

  True.

  Another and a nobler strain must be composed and sung
by us.

  Clearly.

  And shall we proceed to get rid of the weepings and wail-
ings of famous men?

  They will go with the rest.

  But shall we be right in getting rid of them? Reflect: our
principle is that the good man will not consider death terrible
to any other good man who is his comrade.

  Yes; that is our principle.

  And therefore he will not sorrow for his departed friend as
though he had suffered anything terrible?

  He will not.

  Such an one, as we further maintain, is sufficient for himself
and his own happiness, and therefore is least in need of other
men.

  True, he said.

  And for this reason the loss of a son or brother, or the de-
privation of fortune, is to him of all men least terrible.

  Assuredly.

  And therefore he will be least likely to lament, and will bear
with the greatest equanimity any misfortune of this sort which
may befall him.

  Yes, he will feel such a misfortune far less than another.

  Then we shall be right in getting rid of the lamentations of
famous men, and making them over to women (and not even
to women who are good for anything), or to men of a baser
sort, that those who are being educated by us to be the de-
fenders of their country may scorn to do the like.

  That will be very right.

  Then we will once more entreat Homer and the other poets
not to depict Achilles, who is the son of a goddess, first lying
on his side, then on his back, and then on his face; then starting
up and sailing in a frenzy along the shores of the barren sea;
now taking the sooty ashes in both his hands and pouring
them over his head, or weeping and wailing in the various
modes which Homer has delineated. Nor should he describe
Priam, the kinsman of the gods, as praying and beseeching,

  "Rolling in the dirt, calling each man loudly by his name."

Still more earnestly will we beg of him at all events not to in-
troduce the gods lamenting and saying,

  "Alas! my misery! Alas! that I bore the bravest to my sorrow."

But if he must introduce the gods, at any rate let him not dare
so completely to misrepresent the greatest of the gods, as to
make him say--

  "O heavens! with my eyes verily I behold a dear friend of mine
   chased round and round the city, and my heart is sorrowful."

Or again:

  "Woe is me that I am fated to have Sarpedon, dearest of men to
   me, subdued at the hands of Patroclus the son of Menoetius."

For if, my sweet Adeimantus, our youth seriously listen to
such unworthy representations of the gods, instead of laughing
at them as they ought, hardly will any of them deem that he
himself, being but a man, can be dishonored by similar actions;
neither will he rebuke any inclination which may arise in his
mind to say and do the like. And instead of having any shame
or self-control, he will be always whining and lamenting on
slight occasions.

  Yes, he said, that is most true.

  Yes, I replied; but that surely is what ought not to be, as the
argument has just proved to us; and by that proof we must
abide until it is disproved by a better.

  It ought not to be.

  Neither ought our guardians to be given to laughter. For
a fit of laughter which has been indulged to excess almost al-
ways produces a violent reaction.

  So I believe.

  Then persons of worth, even if only mortal men, must not
be represented as overcome by laughter, and still less must such
a representation of the gods be allowed.

  Still less of the gods, as you say, he replied.

  Then we shall not suffer such an expression to be used about
the gods as that of Homer when he describes how

  "Inextinguishable laughter arose among the blessed gods, when
   they saw Hephaestus bustling about the mansion."

On your views, we must not admit them.

  On my views, if you like to father them on me; that we must
not admit them is certain.

  Again, truth should be highly valued; if, as we were saying,
a lie is useless to the gods, and useful only as a medicine to
men, then the use of such medicines should be restricted to
physicians; private individuals have no business with them.

  Clearly not, he said.

  Then if anyone at all is to have the privilege of lying, the
rulers of the State should be the persons; and they, in their
dealings either with enemies or with their own citizens, may be
allowed to lie for the public good. But nobody else should
meddle with anything of the kind; and although the rulers have
this privilege, for a private man to lie to them in return is to
be deemed a more heinous fault than for the patient or the pupil
of a gymnasium not to speak the truth about his own bodily
illnesses to the physician or to the trainer, or for a sailor not to
tell the captain what is happening about the ship and the rest
of the crew, and how things are going with himself or his
fellow-sailors.

  Most true, he said.

  If, then, the ruler catches anybody beside himself lying in
the State,

  "Any of the craftsmen, whether he be priest or physician or
   carpenter,"

he will punish him for introducing a practice which is equally
subversive and destructive of ship or State.

  Most certainly, he said, if our idea of the State is ever car-
ried out.

  In the next place our youth must be temperate?

  Certainly.

  Are not the chief elements of temperance, speaking gener-
ally, obedience to commanders and self-control in sensual
pleasures?

  True.

  Then we shall approve such language as that of Diomede in
Homer,

  "Friend sit still and obey my word,"

and the verses which follow,

  "The Greeks marched breathing prowess,"

  "...in silent awe of their leaders."

and other sentiments of the same kind.

  We shall.

  What of this line,

  "O heavy with wine, who hast the eyes of a dog and the heart of
   a stag,"

and of the words which follow? Would you say that these,
or any similar impertinences which private individuals are sup-
posed to address to their rulers, whether in verse or prose, are
well or ill spoken?

  They are ill spoken.

  They may very possibly afford some amusement, but they do
not conduce to temperance. And therefore they are likely to
do harm to our young men--you would agree with me there?

  Yes.

  And then, again, to make the wisest of men say that nothing
in his opinion is more glorious than

  "When the tables are full of bread and meat, and the cup-bearer
   carries round wine which he draws from the bowl and pours into the
   cups;"

is it fit or conducive to temperance for a young man to hear
such words? or the verse

  "The saddest of fates is to die and meet destiny from hunger"?

What would you say again to the tale of Zeus, who, while other
gods and men were asleep and he the only person awake, lay
devising plans, but forgot them all in a moment through his
lust, and was so completely overcome at the sight of Here that
he would not even go into the hut, but wanted to lie with her on
the ground, declaring that he had never been in such a state of
rapture before, even when they first met one another,

  "Without the knowledge of their parents"

or that other tale of how Hephaestus, because of similar goings
on, cast a chain around Ares and Aphrodite?

  Indeed, he said, I am strongly of opinion that they ought not
to hear that sort of thing.

  But any deeds of endurance which are done or told by famous
men, these they ought to see and hear; as, for example, what
is said in the verses,

  "He smote his breast, and thus reproached his heart,
   Endure, my heart; far worse hast thou endured!"

  Certainly, he said.

  In the next place, we must not let them be receivers of gifts
or lovers of money.

  Certainly not.

  Neither must we sing to them of

  "Gifts persuading gods, and persuading reverend kings."

Neither is Phoenix, the tutor of Achilles, to be approved or
deemed to have given his pupil good counsel when he told him
that he should take the gifts of the Greeks and assist them;
but that without a gift he should not lay aside his anger.
Neither will we believe or acknowledge Achilles himself to
have been such a lover of money that he took Agamemnon's
gifts, or that when he had received payment he restored the
dead body of Hector, but that without payment he was unwill-
ing to do so.

  Undoubtedly, he said, these are not sentiments which can be
approved.

  Loving Homer as I do, I hardly like to say that in attribut-
ing these feelings to Achilles, or in believing that they are truly
attributed to him, he is guilty of downright impiety. As little
can I believe the narrative of his insolence to Apollo, where he
says,

  "Thou hast wronged me, O Far-darter, most abominable of deities.
   Verily I would be even with thee, if I had only the power;"

or his insubordination to the river-god, on whose divinity he
is ready to lay hands; or his offerings to the dead Patroclus of
his own hair, which had been previously dedicated to the other
river-god Spercheius, and that he actually performed this vow;
or that he dragged Hector round the tomb of Patroclus, and
slaughtered the captives at the pyre; of all this I cannot be-
lieve that he was guilty, any more than I can allow our citizens
to believe that he, the wise Cheiron's pupil, the son of a goddess
and of Peleus who was the gentlest of men and third in descent
from Zeus, was so disordered in his wits as to be at one time
the slave of two seemingly inconsistent passions, meanness, not
untainted by avarice, combined with overweening contempt of
gods and men.

  You are quite right, he replied.

  And let us equally refuse to believe, or allow to be repeated,
the tale of Theseus, son of Poseidon, or of Peirithous, son of
Zeus, going forth as they did to perpetrate a horrid rape; or
of any other hero or son of a god daring to do such impious
and dreadful things as they falsely ascribe to them in our day:
and let us further compel the poets to declare either that these
acts were done by them, or that they were not the sons of God;
both in the same breath they shall not be permitted to affirm.
We will not have them trying to persuade our youth that the
gods are the authors of evil, and that heroes are no better than
men--sentiments which, as we were saying, are neither pious
nor true, for we have already proved that evil cannot come from
the gods.

  Assuredly not.
And, further, they are likely to have a bad effect on those
who hear them; for everybody will begin to excuse his own
vices when he is convinced that similar wickednesses are always
being perpetrated by

  "The kindred of the gods, the relatives of Zeus, whose ancestral
   altar, the altar of Zeus, is aloft in air on the peak of Ida,"

and who have

  "the blood of deities yet flowing in their veins."

And therefore let us put an end to such tales, lest they engender
laxity of morals among the young.

  By all means, he replied.

  But now that we are determining what classes of subjects
are or are not to be spoken of, let us see whether any have been
omitted by us. The manner in which gods and demigods and
heroes and the world below should be treated has been already
laid down.

  Very true.

  And what shall we say about men? That is clearly the re-
maining portion of our subject.

  Clearly so.

  But we are not in a condition to answer this question at pres-
ent, my friend.

  Why not?

  Because, if I am not mistaken, we shall have to say that about
men; poets and story-tellers are guilty of making the gravest
misstatements when they tell us that wicked men are often
happy, and the good miserable; and that injustice is profitable
when undetected, but that justice is a man's own loss and an-
other's gain--these things we shall forbid them to utter, and
command them to sing and say the opposite.

  To be sure we shall, he replied.

  But if you admit that I am right in this, then I shall main-
tain that you have implied the principle for which we have
been all along contending.

  I grant the truth of your inference.

  That such things are or are not to be said about men is a ques-
tion which we cannot determine until we have discovered what
justice is, and how naturally advantageous to the possessor,
whether he seem to be just or not.

  Most true, he said.

  Enough of the subjects of poetry: let us now speak of the
style; and when this has been considered, both matter and man-
ner will have been completely treated.

  I do not understand what you mean, said Adeimantus.

  Then I must make you understand; and perhaps I may be
more intelligible if I put the matter in this way. You are
aware, I suppose, that all mythology and poetry are a narration
of events, either past, present, or to come?

  Certainly, he replied.

  And narration may be either simple narration or imitation,
or a union of the two?
That, again, he said, I do not quite understand.

  I fear that I must be a ridiculous teacher when I have so
much difficulty in making myself apprehended. Like a bad
speaker, therefore, I will not take the whole of the subject, but
will break a piece off in illustration of my meaning. You know
the first lines of the "Iliad," in which the poet says that Chryses
prayed Agamemnon to release his daughter, and that Agamem-
non flew into a passion with him; whereupon Chryses, failing
of his object, invoked the anger of the god against the Achaeans.
Now as far as these lines,

  "And he prayed all the Greeks, but especially the two sons of Atreus,
   the chiefs of the people,"

the poet is speaking in his own person; he never leads us to
suppose that he is anyone else. But in what follows he takes
the person of Chryses, and then he does all that he can to make
us believe that the speaker is not Homer, but the aged priest
himself. And in this double form he has cast the entire narra-
tive of the events which occurred at Troy and in Ithaca and
throughout the "Odyssey."

  Yes.

  And a narrative it remains both in the speeches which the
poet recites from time to time and in the intermediate passages?

  Quite true.

  But when the poet speaks in the person of another, may we
not say that he assimilates his style to that of the person who,
as he informs you, is going to speak?

  Certainly.

  And this assimilation of himself to another, either by the use
of voice or gesture, is the imitation of the person whose char-
acter he assumes?

  Of course.

  Then in this case the narrative of the poet may be said to
proceed by way of imitation?

  Very true.

  Or, if the poet everywhere appears and never conceals him-
self, then again the imitation is dropped, and his poetry becomes
simple narration. However, in order that I may make my
meaning quite clear, and that you may no more say, "I don't
understand," I will show how the change might be effected.
If Homer had said, "The priest came, having his daughter's
ransom in his hands, supplicating the Achaeans, and above all
the kings;" and then if, instead of speaking in the person of
Chryses, he had continued in his own person, the words would
have been, not imitation, but simple narration. The passage
would have run as follows (I am no poet, and therefore I drop
the metre): "The priest came and prayed the gods on behalf
of the Greeks that they might capture Troy and return safely
home, but begged that they would give him back his daughter,
and take the ransom which he brought, and respect the god.
Thus he spoke, and the other Greeks revered the priest and as-
sented. But Agamemnon was wroth, and bade him depart and
not come again, lest the staff and chaplets of the god should
be of no avail to him--the daughter of Chryses should not be
released, he said--she should grow old with him in Argos.
And then he told him to go away and not to provoke him, if he
intended to get home unscathed. And the old man went away
in fear and silence, and, when he had left the camp, he called
upon Apollo by his many names, reminding him of everything
which he had done pleasing to him, whether in building his
temples, or in offering sacrifice, and praying that his good deeds
might be returned to him, and that the Achaeans might expiate
his tears by the arrows of the god"--and so on. In this way
the whole becomes simple narrative.

  I understand, he said.

  Or you may suppose the opposite case--that the intermediate
passages are omitted, and the dialogue only left.

  That also, he said, I understand; you mean, for example, as
in tragedy.

  You have conceived my meaning perfectly; and if I mistake
not, what you failed to apprehend before is now made clear to
you, that poetry and mythology are, in some cases, wholly imi-
tative--instances of this are supplied by tragedy and comedy;
there is likewise the opposite style, in which the poet is the only
speaker--of this the dithyramb affords the best example; and
the combination of both is found in epic and in several other
styles of poetry. Do I take you with me?

  Yes, he said; I see now what you meant.

  I will ask you to remember also what I began by saying,
that we had done with the subject and might proceed to the
style.

  Yes, I remember.

  In saying this, I intended to imply that we must come to an
understanding about the mimetic art--whether the poets, in
narrating their stories, are to be allowed by us to imitate, and if
so, whether in whole or in part, and if the latter, in what parts;
or should all imitation be prohibited?

  You mean, I suspect, to ask whether tragedy and comedy
shall be admitted into our State?

  Yes, I said; but there may be more than this in question: I
really do not know as yet, but whither the argument may blow,
thither we go.

  And go we will, he said.

  Then, Adeimantus, let me ask you whether our guardians
ought to be imitators; or rather, has not this question been de-
cided by the rule already laid down that one man can only do
one thing well, and not many; and that if he attempt many, he
will altogether fail of gaining much reputation in any?

  Certainly.

  And this is equally true of imitation; no one man can imitate
many things as well as he would imitate a single one?

  He cannot.

  Then the same person will hardly be able to play a serious
part in life, and at the same time to be an imitator and imitate
many other parts as well; for even when two species of imita-
tion are nearly allied, the same persons cannot succeed in both,
as, for example, the writers of tragedy and comedy--did you
not just now call them imitations?

  Yes, I did; and you are right in thinking that the same per-
sons cannot succeed in both.

  Any more than they can be rhapsodists and actors at once?

  True.

  Neither are comic and tragic actors the same; yet all these
things are but imitations.

  They are so.

  And human nature, Adeimantus, appears to have been coined
into yet smaller pieces, and to be as incapable of imitating many
things well, as of performing well the actions of which the imi-
tations are copies.

  Quite true, he replied.

  If then we adhere to our original notion and bear in mind
that our guardians, setting aside every other business, are to
dedicate themselves wholly to the maintenance of freedom in
the State, making this their craft, and engaging in no work
which does not bear on this end, they ought not to practise or
imitate anything else; if they imitate at all, they should imitate
from youth upward only those characters which are suitable
to their profession--the courageous, temperate, holy, free, and
the like; but they should not depict or be skilful at imitating
any kind of illiberality or baseness, lest from imitation they
should come to be what they imitate. Did you never observe
how imitations, beginning in early youth and continuing far
into life, at length grow into habits and become a second nature,
affecting body, voice, and mind?

  Yes, certainly, he said.

  Then, I said, we will not allow those for whom we profess
a care and of whom we say that they ought to be good men,
to imitate a woman, whether young or old, quarrelling with
her husband, or striving and vaunting against the gods in con-
ceit of her happiness, or when she is in affliction, or sorrow, or
weeping; and certainly not one who is in sickness, love, or
labor.

  Very right, he said.

  Neither must they represent slaves, male or female, per-
forming the offices of slaves?

  They must not.

  And surely not bad men, whether cowards or any others,
who do the reverse of what we have just been prescribing, who
scold or mock or revile one another in drink or out of drink,
or who in any other manner sin against themselves and their
neighbors in word or deed, as the manner of such is. Neither
should they be trained to imitate the action or speech of men
or women who are mad or bad; for madness, like vice, is to be
known but not to be practised or imitated.

  Very true, he replied.

  Neither may they imitate smiths or other artificers, or oars-
men, or boatswains, or the like?

  How can they, he said, when they are not allowed to apply
their minds to the callings of any of these?

  Nor may they imitate the neighing of horses, the bellowing
of bulls, the murmur of rivers and roll of the ocean, thunder,
and all that sort of thing?

  Nay, he said, if madness be forbidden, neither may they copy
the behavior of madmen.

  You mean, I said, if I understand you aright, that there is
one sort of narrative style which may be employed by a truly
good man when he has anything to say, and that another sort
will be used by a man of an opposite character and education.

  And which are these two sorts? he asked.

  Suppose, I answered, that a just and good man in the course
of a narration comes on some saying or action of another good
man--I should imagine that he will like to personate him, and
will not be ashamed of this sort of imitation: he will be most
ready to play the part of the good man when he is acting firmly
and wisely; in a less degree when he is overtaken by illness or
love or drink, or has met with any other disaster. But when
he comes to a character which is unworthy of him, he will not
make a study of that; he will disdain such a person, and will
assume his likeness, if at all, for a moment only when he is per-
forming some good action; at other times he will be ashamed
to play a part which he has never practised, nor will he like to
fashion and frame himself after the baser models; he feels the
employment of such an art, unless in jest, to be beneath him,
and his mind revolts at it.

  So I should expect, he replied.

  Then he will adopt a mode of narration such as we have
illustrated out of Homer, that is to say, his style will be both
imitative and narrative; but there will be very little of the
former, and a great deal of the latter. Do you agree?

  Certainly, he said; that is the model which such a speaker
must necessarily take.

  But there is another sort of character who will narrate any-
thing, and, the worse he is, the more unscrupulous he will be;
nothing will be too bad for him: and he will be ready to imi-
tate anything, not as a joke, but in right good earnest, and be-
fore a large company. As I was just now saying, he will
attempt to represent the roll of thunder, the noise of wind and
hail, or the creaking of wheels, and pulleys, and the various
sounds of flutes, pipes, trumpets, and all sorts of instruments:
he will bark like a dog, bleat like a sheep, or crow like a cock;
his entire art will consist in imitation of voice and gesture, and
there will be very little narration.

  That, he said, will be his mode of speaking.

  These, then, are the two kinds of style?

  Yes.

  And you would agree with me in saying that one of them
is simple and has but slight changes; and if the harmony and
rhythm are also chosen for their simplicity, the result is that
the speaker, if he speaks correctly, is always pretty much the
same in style, and he will keep within the limits of a single
harmony (for the changes are not great), and in like manner
he will make use of nearly the same rhythm?

  That is quite true, he said.

  Whereas the other requires all sorts of harmonies and all
sorts of rhythms, if the music and the style are to correspond,
because the style has all sorts of changes.

  That is also perfectly true, he replied.

  And do not the two styles, or the mixture of the two, com-
prehend all poetry, and every form of expression in words?
No one can say anything except in one or other of them or in
both together.

  They include all, he said.

  And shall we receive into our State all the three styles, or
one only of the two unmixed styles? or would you include the
mixed?

  I should prefer only to admit the pure imitator of virtue.

  Yes, I said, Adeimantus; but the mixed style is also very
charming: and indeed the pantomimic, which is the opposite
of the one chosen by you, is the most popular style with children
and their attendants, and with the world in general.

  I do not deny it.

  But I suppose you would argue that such a style is unsuit-
able to our State, in which human nature is not twofold or man-
ifold, for one man plays one part only?

  Yes; quite unsuitable.

  And this is the reason why in our State, and in our State
only, we shall find a shoemaker to be a shoemaker and not a
pilot also, and a husbandman to be a husbandman and not a
dicast also, and a soldier a soldier and not a trader also, and
the same throughout?

  True, he said.

  And therefore when any one of these pantomimic gentlemen,
who are so clever that they can imitate anything, comes to us,
and makes a proposal to exhibit himself and his poetry, we will
fall down and worship him as a sweet and holy and wonderful
being; but we must also inform him that in our State such as
he are not permitted to exist; the law will not allow them.
And so when we have anointed him with myrrh, and set a gar-
land of wool upon his head, we shall send him away to another
city. For we mean to employ for our souls' health the rougher
and severer poet or story-teller, who will imitate the style of
the virtuous only, and will follow those models which we pre-
scribed at first when we began the education of our soldiers.

  We certainly will, he said, if we have the power.

  Then now, my friend, I said, that part of music or literary
education which relates to the story or myth may be considered
to be finished; for the matter and manner have both been dis-
cussed.

  I think so too, he said.

  Next in order will follow melody and song.

  That is obvious.
Everyone can see already what we ought to say about them,
if we are to be consistent with ourselves.

  I fear, said Glaucon, laughing, that the word "everyone"
hardly includes me, for I cannot at the moment say what they
should be; though I may guess.

  At any rate you can tell that a song or ode has three parts--
the words, the melody, and the rhythm; that degree of knowl-
edge I may presuppose?

  Yes, he said; so much as that you may.

  And as for the words, there will surely be no difference be-
tween words which are and which are not set to music; both
will conform to the same laws, and these have been already
determined by us?

  Yes.

  And the melody and rhythm will depend upon the words?

  Certainly.

  We were saying, when we spoke of the subject-matter, that
we had no need of lamentation and strains of sorrow?

  True.

  And which are the harmonies expressive of sorrow? You
are musical, and can tell me.

  The harmonies which you mean are the mixed or tenor
Lydian, and the full-toned or bass Lydian, and such like.

  These then, I said, must be banished; they are of no use, even
to women who have a character to maintain, and much less
to men.
Certainly.

  In the next place, drunkenness and softness and indolence
are utterly unbecoming the character of our guardians.

  Utterly unbecoming.

  And which are the soft or drinking harmonies?

  The Ionian, he replied, and the Lydian; they are termed
"relaxed."

  Well, and are these of any military use?

  Quite the reverse, he replied; and if so, the Dorian and the
Phrygian are the only ones which you have left.

  I answered: Of the harmonies I know nothing, but I want
to have one warlike, to sound the note or accent which a brave
man utters in the hour of danger and stern resolve, or when
his cause is failing, and he is going to wounds or death or is
overtaken by some other evil, and at every such crisis meets
the blows of fortune with firm step and a determination to en-
dure; and another to be used by him in times of peace and free-
dom of action, when there is no pressure of necessity, and he is
seeking to persuade God by prayer, or man by instruction and
admonition, or on the other hand, when he is expressing his
willingness to yield to persuasion or entreaty or admonition,
and which represents him when by prudent conduct he has at-
tained his end, not carried away by his success, but acting mod-
erately and wisely under the circumstances, and acquiescing
in the event. These two harmonies I ask you to leave; the
strain of necessity and the strain of freedom, the strain of the
unfortunate and the strain of the fortunate, the strain of cour-
age, and the strain of temperance; these, I say, leave.

  And these, he replied, are the Dorian and Phrygian har-
monies of which I was just now speaking.

  Then, I said, if these and these only are to be used in our
songs and melodies, we shall not want multiplicity of notes
or a panharmonic scale?

  I suppose not.

  Then we shall not maintain the artificers of lyres with three
corners and complex scales, or the makers of any other many-
stringed, curiously harmonized instruments?

  Certainly not.

  But what do you say to flute-makers and flute-players?
Would you admit them into our State when you reflect that
in this composite use of harmony the flute is worse than all the
stringed instruments put together; even the panharmonic
music is only an imitation of the flute?

  Clearly not.

  There remain then only the lyre and the harp for use in the
city, and the shepherds may have a pipe in the country.

  That is surely the conclusion to be drawn from the argument.

  The preferring of Apollo and his instruments to Marsyas
and his instruments is not at all strange, I said.

  Not at all, he replied.

  And so, by the dog of Egypt, we have been unconsciously
purging the State, which not long ago we termed luxurious.

  And we have done wisely, he replied.

  Then let us now finish the purgation, I said. Next in order
to harmonies, rhythms will naturally follow, and they should
be subject to the same rules, for we ought not to seek out com-
plex systems of metre, or metres of every kind, but rather to
discover what rhythms are the expressions of a courageous and
harmonious life; and when we have found them, we shall adapt
the foot and the melody to words having a like spirit, not the
words to the foot and melody. To say what these rhythms
are will be your duty--you must teach me them, as you have
already taught me the harmonies.

  But, indeed, he replied, I cannot tell you. I only know that
there are some three principles of rhythm out of which metrical
systems are framed, just as in sounds there are four notes
out of which all the harmonies are composed; that is an obser-
vation which I have made. But of what sort of lives they are
severally the imitations I am unable to say.

  Then, I said, we must take Damon into our counsels; and
he will tell us what rhythms are expressive of meanness, or
insolence, or fury, or other unworthiness, and what are to be re-
served for the expression of opposite feelings. And I think that
I have an indistinct recollection of his mentioning a complex
Cretic rhythm; also a dactylic or heroic, and he arranged them
in some manner which I do not quite understand, making the
rhythms equal in the rise and fall of the foot, long and short al-
ternating; and, unless I am mistaken, he spoke of an iambic as
well as of a trochaic rhythm, and assigned to them short and
long quantities. Also in some cases he appeared to praise or
censure the movement of the foot quite as much as the rhythm;
or perhaps a combination of the two; for I am not certain what
he meant. These matters, however, as I was saying, had better
be referred to Damon himself, for the analysis of the subject
would be difficult, you know?

  Rather so, I should say.

  But there is no difficulty in seeing that grace or the absence
of grace is an effect of good or bad rhythm.

  None at all.

  And also that good and bad rhythm naturally assimilate to
a good and bad style; and that harmony and discord in like
manner follow style; for our principle is that rhythm and har-
mony are regulated by the words, and not the words by them.

  Just so, he said, they should follow the words.

  And will not the words and the character of the style depend
on the temper of the soul?

  Yes.

  And everything else on the style?

  Yes.

  Then beauty of style and harmony and grace and good
rhythm depend on simplicity--I mean the true simplicity of a
rightly and nobly ordered mind and character, not that other
simplicity which is only an euphemism for folly?

  Very true, he replied.

  And if our youth are to do their work in life, must they not
make these graces and harmonies their perpetual aim?

  They must.

  And surely the art of the painter and every other creative
and constructive art are full of them--weaving, embroidery,
architecture, and every kind of manufacture; also nature,
animal and vegetable--in all of them there is grace or the ab-
sence of grace. And ugliness and discord and inharmonious
motion are nearly allied to ill-words and ill-nature, as grace
and harmony are the twin sisters of goodness and virtue and
bear their likeness.

  That is quite true, he said.

  But shall our superintendence go no further, and are the
poets only to be required by us to express the image of the good
in their works, on pain, if they do anything else, of expulsion
from our State? Or is the same control to be extended to other
artists, and are they also to be prohibited from exhibiting the
opposite forms of vice and intemperance and meanness and
indecency in sculpture and building and the other creative arts;
and is he who cannot conform to this rule of ours to be pre-
vented from practising his art in our State, lest the taste of our
citizens be corrupted by him? We would not have our guard-
ians grow up amid images of moral deformity, as in some
noxious pasture, and there browse and feed upon many a bane-
ful herb and flower day by day, little by little, until they silently
gather a festering mass of corruption in their own soul. Let
our artists rather be those who are gifted to discern the true
nature of the beautiful and graceful; then will our youth dwell
in a land of health, amid fair sights and sounds, and receive the
good in everything; and beauty, the effluence of fair works,
shall flow into the eye and ear, like a health-giving breeze from
a purer region, and insensibly draw the soul from earliest years
into likeness and sympathy with the beauty of reason.

  There can be no nobler training than that, he replied.

  And therefore, I said, Glaucon, musical training is a more
potent instrument than any other, because rhythm and harmony
find their way into the inward places of the soul, on which they
mightily fasten, imparting grace, and making the soul of him
who is rightly educated graceful, or of him who is ill-educated
ungraceful; and also because he who has received this true edu-
cation of the inner being will most shrewdly perceive omissions
or faults in art and nature, and with a true taste, while he
praises and rejoices over and receives into his soul the good,
and becomes noble and good, he will justly blame and hate the
bad, now in the days of his youth, even before he is able to
know the reason why; and when reason comes he will recognize
and salute the friend with whom his education has made him
long familiar.

  Yes, he said, I quite agree with you in thinking that our
youth should be trained in music and on the grounds which
you mention.

  Just as in learning to read, I said, we were satisfied when
we knew the letters of the alphabet, which are very few, in all
their recurring sizes and combinations; not slighting them as
unimportant whether they occupy a space large or small, but
everywhere eager to make them out; and not thinking ourselves
perfect in the art of reading until we recognize them wherever
they are found:
True--

  Or, as we recognize the reflection of letters in the water, or
in a mirror, only when we know the letters themselves; the
same art and study giving us the knowledge of both:
Exactly--

  Even so, as I maintain, neither we nor our guardians, whom
we have to educate, can ever become musical until we and they
know the essential forms of temperance, courage, liberality,
magnificence, and their kindred, as well as the contrary forms,
in all their combinations, and can recognize them and their
images wherever they are found, not slighting them either in
small things or great, but believing them all to be within the
sphere of one art and study.

  Most assuredly.

  And when a beautiful soul harmonizes with a beautiful form,
and the two are cast in one mould, that will be the fairest of
sights to him who has an eye to see it?

  The fairest indeed.

  And the fairest is also the loveliest?

  That may be assumed.

  And the man who has the spirit of harmony will be most in
love with the loveliest; but he will not love him who is of an
inharmonious soul?

  That is true, he replied, if the deficiency be in his soul; but
if there be any merely bodily defect in another he will be patient
of it, and will love all the same.

  I perceive, I said, that you have or have had experiences of
this sort, and I agree. But let me ask you another question:
Has excess of pleasure any affinity to temperance?

  How can that be? he replied; pleasure deprives a man of the
use of his faculties quite as much as pain.

  Or any affinity to virtue in general?

  None whatever.

  Any affinity to wantonness and intemperance?

  Yes, the greatest.

  And is there any greater or keener pleasure than that of
sensual love?

  No, nor a madder.

  Whereas true love is a love of beauty and order--temperate
and harmonious?

  Quite true, he said.

  Then no intemperance or madness should be allowed to ap-
proach true love?

  Certainly not.

  Then mad or intemperate pleasure must never be allowed
to come near the lover and his beloved; neither of them can
have any part in it if their love is of the right sort?

  No, indeed, Socrates, it must never come near them.

  Then I suppose that in the city which we are founding you
would make a law to the effect that a friend should use no other
familiarity to his love than a father would use to his son, and
then only for a noble purpose, and he must first have the other's
consent; and this rule is to limit him in all his intercourse, and
he is never to be seen going further, or, if he exceeds, he is to
be deemed guilty of coarseness and bad taste.

  I quite agree, he said.

  Thus much of music, which makes a fair ending; for what
should be the end of music if not the love of beauty?

  I agree, he said.

  After music comes gymnastics, in which our youth are next
to be trained.

  Certainly.
Gymnastics as well as music should begin in early years; the
training in it should be careful and should continue through
life. Now my belief is--and this is a matter upon which I
should like to have your opinion in confirmation of my own,
but my own belief is--not that the good body by any bodily
excellence improves the soul, but, on the contrary, that the
good soul, by her own excellence, improves the body as far as
this may be possible. What do you say?

  Yes, I agree.

  Then, to the mind when adequately trained, we shall be right
in handing over the more particular care of the body; and in
order to avoid prolixity we will now only give the general out-
lines of the subject.

  Very good.

  That they must abstain from intoxication has been already
remarked by us; for of all persons a guardian should be the
last to get drunk and not know where in the world he is.

  Yes, he said; that a guardian should require another guar-
dian to take care of him is ridiculous indeed.

  But next, what shall we say of their food; for the men are
in training for the great contest of all--are they not?

  Yes, he said.

  And will the habit of body of our ordinary athletes be suited
to them?

  Why not?

  I am afraid, I said, that a habit of body such as they have is
but a sleepy sort of thing, and rather perilous to health. Do
you not observe that these athletes sleep away their lives, and
are liable to most dangerous illnesses if they depart, in ever so
slight a degree, from their customary regimen?

  Yes, I do.

  Then, I said, a finer sort of training will be required for our
warrior athletes, who are to be like wakeful dogs, and to see
and hear with the utmost keenness; amid the many changes of
water and also of food, of summer heat and winter cold, which
they will have to endure when on a campaign, they must not
be liable to break down in health.

  That is my view.

  The really excellent gymnastics is twin sister of that simple
music which we were just now describing.

  How so?

  Why, I conceive that there is a gymnastics which, like our
music, is simple and good; and especially the military gym-
nastics.

  What do you mean?

  My meaning may be learned from Homer; he, you know,
feeds his heroes at their feasts, when they are campaigning,
on soldiers' fare; they have no fish, although they are on the
shores of the Hellespont, and they are not allowed boiled meats,
but only roast, which is the food most convenient for soldiers,
requiring only that they should light a fire, and not involving
the trouble of carrying about pots and pans.

  True.

  And I can hardly be mistaken in saying that sweet sauces
are nowhere mentioned in Homer. In proscribing them, how-
ever, he is not singular; all professional athletes are well aware
that a man who is to be in good condition should take nothing
of the kind.

  Yes, he said; and knowing this, they are quite right in not
taking them.

  Then you would not approve of Syracusan dinners, and the
refinements of Sicilian cookery?

  I think not.

  Nor, if a man is to be in condition, would you allow him to
have a Corinthian girl as his fair friend?

  Certainly not.

  Neither would you approve of the delicacies, as they are
thought, of Athenian confectionery?

  Certainly not.

  All such feeding and living may be rightly compared by us
to melody and song composed in the panharmonic style, and
in all the rhythms.
Exactly.

  There complexity engendered license, and here disease;
whereas simplicity in music was the parent of temperance in
the soul; and simplicity in gymnastics of health in the body.

  Most true, he said.

  But when intemperance and diseases multiply in a State,
halls of justice and medicine are always being opened; and the
arts of the doctor and the lawyer give themselves airs, finding
how keen is the interest which not only the slaves but the free-
men of a city take about them.

  Of course.

  And yet what greater proof can there be of a bad and dis-
graceful state of education than this, that not only artisans and
the meaner sort of people need the skill of first-rate physicians
and judges, but also those who would profess to have had a
liberal education? Is it not disgraceful, and a great sign of
the want of good-breeding, that a man should have to go abroad
for his law and physic because he has none of his own at home,
and must therefore surrender himself into the hands of other
men whom he makes lords and judges over him?

  Of all things, he said, the most disgraceful.

  Would you say "most," I replied, when you consider that
there is a further stage of the evil in which a man is not only
a life-long litigant, passing all his days in the courts, either
as plaintiff or defendant, but is actually led by his bad taste to
pride himself on his litigiousness; he imagines that he is a mas-
ter in dishonesty; able to take every crooked turn, and wriggle
into and out of every hole, bending like a withy and getting
out of the way of justice: and all for what?--in order to gain
small points not worth mentioning, he not knowing that so to
order his life as to be able to do without a napping judge is a
far higher and nobler sort of thing. Is not that still more dis-
graceful?

  Yes, he said, that is still more disgraceful.

  Well, I said, and to require the help of medicine, not when
a wound has to be cured, or on occasion of an epidemic, but
just because, by indolence and a habit of life such as we have
been describing, men fill themselves with waters and winds,
as if their bodies were a marsh, compelling the ingenious sons
of Asclepius to find more names for diseases, such as flatulence
and catarrh; is not this, too, a disgrace?

  Yes, he said, they do certainly give very strange and new-
fangled names to diseases.

  Yes, I said, and I do not believe that there were any such
diseases in the days of Asclepius; and this I infer from the cir-
cumstance that the hero Eurypylus, after he has been wounded
in Homer, drinks a posset of Pramnian wine well besprinkled
with barley-meal and grated cheese, which are certainly in-
flammatory, and yet the sons of Asclepius who were at the
Trojan war do not blame the damsel who gives him the drink,
or rebuke Patroclus, who is treating his case.

  Well, he said, that was surely an extraordinary drink to be
given to a person in his condition.

  Not so extraordinary, I replied, if you bear in mind that in
former days, as is commonly said, before the time of Herodicus,
the guild of Asclepius did not practise our present system of
medicine, which may be said to educate diseases. But Herodi-
cus, being a trainer, and himself of a sickly constitution, by a
combination of training and doctoring found out a way of tor-
turing first and chiefly himself, and secondly the rest of the
world.

  How was that? he said.

  By the invention of lingering death; for he had a mortal
disease which he perpetually tended, and as recovery was out
of the question, he passed his entire life as a valetudinarian;
he could do nothing but attend upon himself, and he was in
constant torment whenever he departed in anything from his
usual regimen, and so dying hard, by the help of science he
struggled on to old age.

  A rare reward of his skill!

  Yes, I said; a reward which a man might fairly expect who
never understood that, if Asclepius did not instruct his de-
scendants in valetudinarian arts, the omission arose, not from
ignorance or inexperience of such a branch of medicine, but
because he knew that in all well-ordered States every individual
has an occupation to which he must attend, and has therefore
no leisure to spend in continually being ill. This we remark
in the case of the artisan, but, ludicrously enough, do not apply
the same rule to people of the richer sort.

  How do you mean? he said.

  I mean this: When a carpenter is ill he asks the physician
for a rough and ready cure; an emetic or a purge or a cautery
or the knife--these are his remedies. And if someone pre-
scribes for him a course of dietetics, and tells him that he must
swathe and swaddle his head, and all that sort of thing, he re-
plies at once that he has no time to be ill, and that he sees no
good in a life which is spent in nursing his disease to the neglect
of his customary employment; and therefore bidding good-by
to this sort of physician, he resumes his ordinary habits, and
either gets well and lives and does his business, or, if his con-
stitution fails, he dies and has no more trouble.

  Yes, he said, and a man in his condition of life ought to use
the art of medicine thus far only.

  Has he not, I said, an occupation; and what profit would
there be in his life if he were deprived of his occupation?

  Quite true, he said.

  But with the rich man this is otherwise; of him we do not
say that he has any specially appointed work which he must
perform, if he would live.

  He is generally supposed to have nothing to do.

  Then you never heard of the saying of Phocylides, that as
soon as a man has a livelihood he should practise virtue?

  Nay, he said, I think that he had better begin somewhat
sooner.

  Let us not have a dispute with him about this, I said; but
rather ask ourselves: Is the practise of virtue obligatory on
the rich man, or can he live without it? And if obligatory on
him, then let us raise a further question, whether this dieting
of disorders, which is an impediment to the application of the
mind in carpentering and the mechanical arts, does not equally
stand in the way of the sentiment of Phocylides?

  Of that, he replied, there can be no doubt; such excessive
care of the body, when carried beyond the rules of gymnastics,
is most inimical to the practice of virtue.

  Yes, indeed, I replied, and equally incompatible with the
management of a house, an army, or an office of state; and,
what is most Important of all, irreconcileable with any kind
of study or thought or self-reflection--there is a constant sus-
picion that headache and giddiness are to be ascribed to philos-
ophy, and hence all practising or making trial of virtue in the
higher sense is absolutely stopped; for a man is always fancy-
ing that he is being made ill, and is in constant anxiety about
the state of his body.

  Yes, likely enough.

  And therefore our politic Asclepius may be supposed to have
exhibited the power of his art only to persons who, being gen-
erally of healthy constitution and habits of life, had a definite
ailment; such as these he cured by purges and operations, and
bade them live as usual, herein consulting the interests of the
State; but bodies which disease had penetrated through and
through he would not have attempted to cure by gradual proc-
esses of evacuation and infusion: he did not want to lengthen
out good-for-nothing lives, or to have weak fathers begetting
weaker sons;--if a man was not able to live in the ordinary way
he had no business to cure him; for such a cure would have
been of no use either to himself, or to the State.

  Then, he said, you regard Asclepius as a statesman.

  Clearly; and his character is further illustrated by his sons.
Note that they were heroes in the days of old and practised
the medicines of which I am speaking at the siege of Troy:
You will remember how, when Pandarus wounded Menelaus,
they

  "Sucked the blood out of the wound, and sprinkled soothing remedies,"

but they never prescribed what the patient was afterward to
eat or drink in the case of Menelaus, any more than in the case
of Eurypylus; the remedies, as they conceived, were enough
to heal any man who before he was wounded was healthy and
regular in his habits; and even though he did happen to drink
a posset of Pramnian wine, he might get well all the same.
But they would have nothing to do with unhealthy and intem-
perate subjects, whose lives were of no use either to themselves
or others; the art of medicine was not designed for their good,
and though they were as rich as Midas, the sons of Asclepius
would have declined to attend them.

  They were very acute persons, those sons of Asclepius.

  Naturally so, I replied. Nevertheless, the tragedians and
Pindar disobeying our behests, although they acknowledge that
Asclepius was the son of Apollo, say also that he was bribed
into healing a rich man who was at the point of death, and for
this reason he was struck by lightning. But we, in accordance
with the principle already affirmed by us, will not believe them
when they tell us both; if he was the son of a god, we maintain
that he was not avaricious; or, if he was avaricious, he was not
the son of a god.

  All that, Socrates, is excellent; but I should like to put a
question to you: Ought there not to be good physicians in a
State, and are not the best those who have treated the greatest
number of constitutions, good and bad? and are not the best
judges in like manner those who are acquainted with all sorts
of moral natures?

  Yes, I said, I too would have good judges and good physi-
cians. But do you know whom I think good?

  Will you tell me?

  I will, if I can. Let me, however, note that in the same ques-
tion you join two things which are not the same.

  How so? he asked.

  Why, I said, you join physicians and judges. Now the most
skilful physicians are those who, from their youth upward,
have combined with the knowledge of their art the greatest
experience of disease; they had better not be robust in health,
and should have had all manner of diseases in their own per-
sons. For the body, as I conceive, is not the instrument with
which they cure the body; in that case we could not allow them
ever to be or to have been sickly; but they cure the body with
the mind, and the mind which has become and is sick can cure
nothing.

  That is very true, he said.

  But with the judge it is otherwise; since he governs mind
by mind; he ought not therefore to have been trained among
vicious minds, and to have associated with them from youth
upward, and to have gone through the whole calendar of crime,
only in order that he may quickly infer the crimes of others as
he might their bodily diseases from his own self-consciousness;
the honorable mind which is to form a healthy judgment should
have had no experience or contamination of evil habits when
young. And this is the reason why in youth good men often
appear to be simple, and are easily practised upon by the dis-
honest, because they have no examples of what evil is in
their own souls.

  Yes, he said, they are far too apt to be deceived.

  Therefore, I said, the judge should not be young; he should
have learned to know evil, not from his own soul, but from late
and long observation of the nature of evil in others: knowledge
should be his guide, not personal experience.

  Yes, he said, that is the ideal of a judge.

  Yes, I replied, and he will be a good man (which is my an-
swer to your question); for he is good who has a good soul.
But the cunning and suspicious nature of which we spoke--
he who has committed many crimes, and fancies himself to be
a master in wickedness--when he is among his fellows, is won-
derful in the precautions which he takes, because he judges of
them by himself: but when he gets into the company of men
of virtue, who have the experience of age, he appears to be a
fool again, owing to his unseasonable suspicions; he cannot
recognize an honest man, because he has no pattern of honesty
in himself; at the same time, as the bad are more numerous
than the good, and he meets with them oftener, he thinks him-
self, and is by others thought to be, rather wise than foolish.

  Most true, he said.

  Then the good and wise judge whom we are seeking is not
this man, but the other; for vice cannot know virtue too, but
a virtuous nature, educated by time, will acquire a knowledge
both of virtue and vice: the virtuous, and not the vicious, man
has wisdom--in my opinion.

  And in mine also.

  This is the sort of medicine, and this is the sort of law, which
you will sanction in your State. They will minister to better
natures, giving health both of soul and of body; but those who
are diseased in their bodies they will leave to die, and the cor-
rupt and incurable souls they will put an end to themselves.

  That is clearly the best thing both for the patients and for the
State.

  And thus our youth, having been educated only in that sim-
ple music which, as we said, inspires temperance, will be re-
luctant to go to law.

  Clearly.

  And the musician, who, keeping to the same track, is con-
tent to practise the simple gymnastics, will have nothing to do
with medicine unless in some extreme case.

  That I quite believe.

  The very exercises and toils which he undergoes are intended
to stimulate the spirited element of his nature, and not to in-
crease his strength; he will not, like common athletes, use exer-
cise and regimen to develop his muscles.

  Very right, he said.

  Neither are the two arts of music and gymnastics really de-
signed, as is often supposed, the one for the training of the soul,
the other for the training of the body.

  What then is the real object of them?

  I believe, I said, that the teachers of both have in view chiefly
the improvement of the soul.

  How can that be? he asked.

  Did you never observe, I said, the effect on the mind itself
of exclusive devotion to gymnastics, or the opposite effect of an
exclusive devotion to music?

  In what way shown? he said.

  The one producing a temper of hardness and ferocity, the
other of softness and effeminacy, I replied.

  Yes, he said, I am quite aware that the mere athlete becomes
too much of a savage, and that the mere musician IS melted
and softened beyond what is good for him.

  Yet surely, I said, this ferocity only comes from spirit, which,
if rightly educated, would give courage, but, if too much in-
tensified, is liable to become hard and brutal.

  That I quite think.

  On the other hand the philosopher will have the quality of
gentleness. And this also, when too much indulged, will turn
to softness, but, if educated rightly, will be gentle and mod-
erate.

  True.

  And in our opinion the guardians ought to have both these
qualities?

  Assuredly.

  And both should be in harmony?

  Beyond question.

  And the harmonious soul is both temperate and courageous?

  Yes.

  And the inharmonious is cowardly and boorish?

  Very true.

  And, when a man allows music to play upon him and to pour
into his soul through the funnel of his ears those sweet and
soft and melancholy airs of which we were just now speaking,
and his whole life is passed in warbling and the delights of
song; in the first stage of the process the passion or spirit which
is in him is tempered like iron, and made useful, instead of brit-
tle and useless. But, if he carries on the softening and sooth-
ing process, in the next stage he begins to melt and waste,
until he has wasted away his spirit and cut out the sinews of
his soul; and he becomes a feeble warrior.

  Very true.

  If the element of spirit is naturally weak in him the change
is speedily accomplished, but if he have a good deal, then the
power of music weakening the spirit renders him excitable; on
the least provocation he flames up at once, and is speedily ex-
tinguished; instead of having spirit he grows irritable and pas-
sionate and is quite impractical.

  Exactly.

  And so in gymnastics, if a man takes violent exercise and
is a great feeder, and the reverse of a great student of music
and philosophy, at first the high condition of his body fills him
with pride and spirit, and he becomes twice the man that he
was.

  Certainly.

  And what happens? if he do nothing else, and holds no con-
verse with the muses, does not even that intelligence which
there may be in him, having no taste of any sort of learning or
inquiry or thought or culture, grow feeble and dull and blind,
his mind never waking up or receiving nourishment, and his
senses not being purged of their mists?

  True, he said.

  And he ends by becoming a hater of philosophy, uncivilized,
never using the weapon of persuasion--he is like a wild beast,
all violence and fierceness, and knows no other way of dealing;
and he lives in all ignorance and evil conditions, and has no
sense of propriety and grace.

  That is quite true, he said.

  And as there are two principles of human nature, one the
spirited and the other the philosophical, some god, as I should
say, has given mankind two arts answering to them (and only
indirectly to the soul and body), in order that these two prin-
ciples (like the strings of an instrument) may be relaxed or
drawn tighter until they are duly harmonized.

  That appears to be the intention.

  And he who mingles music with gymnastics in the fairest
proportions, and best attempers them to the soul, may be rightly
called the true musician and harmonist in a far higher sense
than the tuner of the strings.

  You are quite right, Socrates.

  And such a presiding genius will be always required in our
State if the government is to last.

  Yes, he will be absolutely necessary.

  Such, then, are our principles of nurture and education:
Where would be the use of going into further details about
the dances of our citizens, or about their hunting and coursing,
their gymnastic and equestrian contests? For these all follow
the general principle, and having found that, we shall have no
difficulty in discovering them.

  I dare say that there will be no difficulty.

  Very good, I said; then what is the next question? Must
we not ask who are to be rulers and who subjects?

  Certainly.

  There can be no doubt that the elder must rule the younger.

  Clearly.

  And that the best of these must rule.

  That is also clear.

  Now, are not the best husbandmen those who are most de-
voted to husbandry?

  Yes.

  And as we are to have the best of guardians for our city, must
they not be those who have most the character of guardians?

  Yes.

  And to this end they ought to be wise and efficient, and to
have a special care of the State?

  True.

  And a man will be most likely to care about that which he
loves?

  To be sure.

  And he will be most likely to love that which he regards as
having the same interests with himself, and that of which the
good or evil fortune is supposed by him at any time most to
affect his own?

  Very true, he replied.

  Then there must be a selection. Let us note among the
guardians those who in their whole life show the greatest eager-
ness to do what is for the good of their country, and the greatest
repugnance to do what is against her interests.

  Those are the right men.

  And they will have to be watched at every age, in order
that we may see whether they preserve their resolution, and
never, under the influence either of force or enchantment, for-
get or cast off their sense of duty to the State.

  How cast off? he said.

  I will explain to you, he replied. A resolution may go out
of a man's mind either with his will or against his will; with
his will when he gets rid of a falsehood and learns better,
against his will whenever he is deprived of a truth.

  I understand, he said, the willing loss of a resolution; the
meaning of the unwilling I have yet to learn.

  Why, I said, do you not see that men are unwillingly de-
prived of good, and willingly of evil? Is not to have lost the
truth an evil, and to possess the truth a good? and you would
agree that to conceive things as they are is to possess the truth?

  Yes, he replied; I agree with you in thinking that mankind
are deprived of truth against their will.

  And is not this involuntary deprivation caused either by theft,
or force, or enchantment?

  Still, he replied, I do not understand you.

  I fear that I must have been talking darkly, like the trage-
dians. I only mean that some men are changed by persuasion
and that others forget; argument steals away the hearts of one
class, and time of the other; and this I call theft. Now you
understand me?

  Yes.

  Those again who are forced, are those whom the violence
of some pain or grief compels to change their opinion.

  I understand, he said, and you are quite right.

  And you would also acknowledge that the enchanted are
those who change their minds either under the softer influence
of pleasure, or the sterner influence of fear?

  Yes, he said; everything that deceives may be said to enchant.

  Therefore, as I was just now saying, we must inquire who
are the best guardians of their own conviction that what they
think the interest of the State is to be the rule of their lives.
We must watch them from their youth upward, and make them
perform actions in which they are most likely to forget or to
be deceived, and he who remembers and is not deceived is to
be selected, and he who fails in the trial is to be rejected. That
will be the way?

  Yes.

  And there should also be toils and pains and conflicts pre-
scribed for them, in which they will be made to give further
proof of the same qualities.

  Very right, he replied.

  And then, I said, we must try them with enchantments--that
is the third sort of test--and see what will be their behavior:
like those who take colts amid noise and tumult to see if they
are of a timid nature, so must we take our youth amid terrors
of some kind, and again pass them into pleasures, and prove
them more thoroughly than gold is proved in the furnace, that
we may discover whether they are armed against all enchant-
ments, and of a noble bearing always, good guardians of them-
selves and of the music which they have learned, and retaining
under all circumstances a rhythmical and harmonious nature,
such as will be most serviceable to the individual and to the
State. And he who at every age, as boy and youth and in
mature life, has come out of the trial victorious and pure, shall
be appointed a ruler and guardian of the State; he shall be
honored in life and death, and shall receive sepulture and other
memorials of honor, the greatest that we have to give. But
him who fails, we must reject. I am inclined to think that
this is the sort of way in which our rulers and guardians should
be chosen and appointed. I speak generally, and not with any
pretension to exactness.

  And, speaking generally, I agree with you, he said.

  And perhaps the word "guardian" in the fullest sense ought
to be applied to this higher class only who preserve us against
foreign enemies and maintain peace among our citizens at
home, that the one may not have the will, or the others the
power, to harm us. The young men whom we before called
guardians may be more properly designated auxiliaries and
supporters of the principles of the rulers.

  I agree with you, he said.

  How then may we devise one of those needful falsehoods of
which we lately spoke--just one royal lie which may deceive
the rulers, if that be possible, and at any rate the rest of the
city?

  What sort of lie? he said.

  Nothing new, I replied; only an old Phoenician tale of what
has often occurred before now in other places (as the poets
say, and have made the world believe), though not in our time,
and I do not know whether such an event could ever happen
again, or could now even be made probable, if it did.

  How your words seem to hesitate on your lips!

  You will not wonder, I replied, at my hesitation when you
have heard.

  Speak, he said, and fear not.
Well, then, I will speak, although I really know not how to
look you in the face, or in what words to utter the audacious
fiction, which I propose to communicate gradually, first to the
rulers, then to the soldiers, and lastly to the people. They are
to be told that their youth was a dream, and the education and
training which they received from us, an appearance only; in
reality during all that time they were being formed and fed in
the womb of the earth, where they themselves and their arms
and appurtenances were manufactured; when they were com-
pleted, the earth, their mother, sent them up; and so, their coun-
try being their mother and also their nurse, they are bound to
advise for her good, and to defend her against attacks, and her
citizens they are to regard as children of the earth and their
own brothers.

  You had good reason, he said, to be ashamed of the lie which
you were going to tell.

  True, I replied, but there is more coming; I have only told
you half. Citizens, we shall say to them in our tale, you are
brothers, yet God has framed you differently. Some of you
have the power of command, and in the composition of these
he has mingled gold, wherefore also they have the greatest
honor; others he has made of silver, to be auxiliaries; others
again who are to be husbandmen and craftsmen he has com-
posed of brass and iron; and the species will generally be pre-
served in the children. But as all are of the same original
stock, a golden parent will sometimes have a silver son, or a
silver parent a golden son. And God proclaims as a first prin-
ciple to the rulers, and above all else, that there is nothing which
they should so anxiously guard, or of which they are to be such
good guardians, as of the purity of the race. They should ob-
serve what elements mingle in their offspring; for if the son
of a golden or silver parent has an admixture of brass and iron,
then nature orders a transposition of ranks, and the eye of the
ruler must not be pitiful toward the child because he has to
descend in the scale and become a husbandman or artisan, just
as there may be sons of artisans who having an admixture of
gold or silver in them are raised to honor, and become guardians
or auxiliaries. For an oracle says that when a man of brass
or iron guards the State, it will be destroyed. Such is the tale;
is there any possibility of making our citizens believe in it?

  Not in the present generation, he replied; there is no way
of accomplishing this; but their sons may be made to believe
in the tale, and their sons' sons, and posterity after them.

  I see the difficulty, I replied; yet the fostering of such a be-
lief will make them care more for the city and for one another.
Enough, however, of the fiction, which may now fly abroad
upon the wings of rumor, while we arm our earth-born heroes,
and lead them forth under the command of their rulers. Let
them look round and select a spot whence they can best sup-
press insurrection, if any prove refractory within, and also de-
fend themselves against enemies, who, like wolves, may come
down on the fold from without; there let them encamp, and
when they have encamped, let them sacrifice to the proper gods
and prepare their dwellings.

  Just so, he said.

  And their dwellings must be such as will shield them against
the cold of winter and the heat of summer.

  I suppose that you mean houses, he replied.

  Yes, I said; but they must be the houses of soldiers, and not
of shopkeepers.

  What is the difference? he said.

  That I will endeavor to explain, I replied. To keep watch-
dogs, who, from want of discipline or hunger, or some evil
habit or other, would turn upon the sheep and worry them, and
behave not like dogs, but wolves, would be a foul and mon-
strous thing in a shepherd?

  Truly monstrous, he said.

  And therefore every care must be taken that our auxiliaries,
being stronger than our citizens, may not grow to be too much
for them and become savage tyrants instead of friends and
allies?

  Yes, great care should be taken.

  And would not a really good education furnish the best safe-
guard?

  But they are well-educated already, he replied.

  I cannot be so confident, my dear Glaucon, I said; I am much
more certain that they ought to be, and that true education,
whatever that may be, will have the greatest tendency to civilize
and humanize them in their relations to one another, and to
those who are under their protection.

  Very true, he replied.

  And not only their education, but their habitations, and all
that belongs to them, should be such as will neither impair
their virtue as guardians, nor tempt them to prey upon the other
citizens. Any man of sense must acknowledge that.

  He must.

  Then now let us consider what will be their way of life, if
they are to realize our idea of them. In the first place, none
of them should have any property of his own beyond what is
absolutely necessary; neither should they have a private house
or store closed against anyone who has a mind to enter; their
provisions should be only such as are required by trained war-
riors, who are men of temperance and courage; they should
agree to receive from the citizens a fixed rate of pay, enough to
meet the expenses of the year and no more; and they will go
to mess and live together like soldiers in a camp. Gold and
silver we will tell them that they have from God; the diviner
metal is within them, and they have therefore no need of the
dross which is current among men, and ought not to pollute
the divine by any such earthly admixture; for that commoner
metal has been the source of many unholy deeds, but their own
is undefiled. And they alone of all the citizens may not touch or
handle silver or gold, or be under the same roof with them, or
wear them, or drink from them. And this will be their salva-
tion, and they will be the saviours of the State. But should
they ever acquire homes or lands or moneys of their own, they
will become good housekeepers and husbandmen instead of
guardians, enemies and tyrants instead of allies of the other
citizens; hating and being hated, plotting and being plotted
against, they will pass their whole life in much greater ter-
ror of internal than of external enemies, and the hour of ruin,
both to themselves and to the rest of the State, will be at
hand. For all which reasons may we not say that thus shall
our State be ordered, and that these shall be the regulations
appointed by us for our guardians concerning their houses
and all other matters?

  Yes, said Glaucon.


                       BOOK IV
            WEALTH, POVERTY, AND VIRTUE

(ADEIMANTUS, SOCRATES.)

  HERE Adeimantus interposed a question: How would
you answer, Socrates, said he, if a person were to
say that you are making these people miserable, and
that they are the cause of their own unhappiness; the city
in fact belongs to them, but they are none the better for it;
whereas other men acquire lands, and build large and hand-
some houses, and have everything handsome about them, offer-
ing sacrifices to the gods on their own account, and practis-
ing hospitality; moreover, as you were saying just now, they
have gold and silver, and all that is usual among the favorites
of fortune; but our poor citizens are no better than merce-
naries who are quartered in the city and are always mounting
guard?

  Yes, I said; and you may add that they are only fed, and
not paid in addition to their food, like other men; and there-
fore they cannot, if they would, take a journey of pleasure;
they have no money to spend on a mistress or any other luxu-
rious fancy, which, as the world goes, is thought to be happi-
ness; and many other accusations of the same nature might
be added.

  But, said he, let us suppose all this to be included in the
charge.

  You mean to ask, I said, what will be our answer?

  Yes.

  If we proceed along the old path, my belief, I said, is that
we shall find the answer. And our answer will be that, even
as they are, our guardians may very likely be the happiest
of men; but that our aim in founding the State was not the
disproportionate happiness of any one class, but the greatest
happiness of the whole; we thought that in a State which
is ordered with a view to the good of the whole we should
be most likely to find justice, and in the ill-ordered State in-
justice: and, having found them, we might then decide which
of the two is the happier. At present, I take it, we are fash-
ioning the happy State, not piecemeal, or with a view of mak-
ing a few happy citizens, but as a whole; and by and by we
will proceed to view the opposite kind of State. Suppose that
we were painting a statue, and someone came up to us and
said: Why do you not put the most beautiful colors on the
most beautiful parts of the body--the eyes ought to be pur-
ple, but you have made them black--to him we might fairly
answer: Sir, you would not surely have us beautify the eyes
to such a degree that they are no longer eyes; consider rather
whether, by giving this and the other features their due pro-
portion, we make the whole beautiful. And so I say to you,
do not compel us to assign to the guardians a sort of happi-
ness which will make them anything but guardians; for we
too can clothe our husbandmen in royal apparel, and set
crowns of gold on their heads, and bid them till the ground
as much as they like, and no more. Our potters also might
be allowed to repose on couches, and feast by the fireside,
passing round the wine-cup, while their wheel is conveniently
at hand, and working at pottery only as much as they like;
in this way we might make every class happy--and then, as
you imagine, the whole State would be happy. But do not
put this idea into our heads; for, if we listen to you, the
husbandman will be no longer a husbandman, the potter will
cease to be a potter, and no one will have the character of
any distinct class in the State. Now this is not of much con-
sequence where the corruption of society, and pretension to
be what you are not, are confined to cobblers; but when the
guardians of the laws and of the government are only seem-
ing and not real guardians, then see how they turn the State
upside down; and on the other hand they alone have the
power of giving order and happiness to the State. We mean
our guardians to be true saviours and not the destroyers of the
State, whereas our opponent is thinking of peasants at a fes-
tival, who are enjoying a life of revelry, not of citizens who
are doing their duty to the State. But, if so, we mean differ-
ent things, and he is speaking of something which is not a
State. And therefore we must consider whether in appoint-
ing our guardians we would look to their greatest happiness
individually, or whether this principle of happiness does not
rather reside in the State as a whole. But if the latter be
the truth, then the guardians and auxiliaries, and all others
equally with them, must be compelled or induced to do their
own work in the best way. And thus the whole State will
grow up in a noble order, and the several classes will receive
the proportion of happiness which nature assigns to them.

  I think that you are quite right.

  I wonder whether you will agree with another remark which
occurs to me.

  What may that be?

  There seem to be two causes of the deterioration of the arts.

  What are they?

  Wealth, I said, and poverty.

  How do they act?

  The process is as follows: When a potter becomes rich,
will he, think you, any longer take the same pains with his art?

  Certainly not.

  He will grow more and more indolent and careless?

  Very true.

  And the result will be that he becomes a worse potter?

  Yes; he greatly deteriorates.

  But, on the other hand, if he has no money, and cannot
provide himself with tools or instruments, he will not work
equally well himself, nor will he teach his sons or apprentices
to work equally well.

  Certainly not.

  Then, under the influence either of poverty or of wealth,
workmen and their work are equally liable to degenerate?

  That is evident.

  Here, then, is a discovery of new evils, I said, against which
the guardians will have to watch, or they will creep into the
city unobserved.

  What evils?

  Wealth, I said, and poverty; the one is the parent of lux-
ury and indolence, and the other of meanness and viciousness,
and both of discontent.

  That is very true, he replied; but still I should like to
know, Socrates, how our city will be able to go to war, espe-
cially against an enemy who is rich and powerful, if deprived
of the sinews of war.

  There would certainly be a difficulty, I replied, in going to
war with one such enemy; but there is no difficulty where
there are two of them.

  How so? he asked.

  In the first place, I said, if we have to fight, our side will
be trained warriors fighting against an army of rich men.

  That is true, he said.

  And do you not suppose, Adeimantus, that a single boxer
who was perfect in his art would easily be a match for two
stout and well-to-do gentlemen who were not boxers?

  Hardly, if they came upon him at once.

  What, not, I said, if he were able to run away and then
turn and strike at the one who first came up? And suppos-
ing he were to do this several times under the heat of a scorch-
ing sun, might he not, being an expert, overturn more than
one stout personage?

  Certainly, he said, there would be nothing wonderful in
that.

  And yet rich men probably have a greater superiority in
the science and practise of boxing than they have in military
qualities.

  Likely enough.

  Then we may assume that our athletes will be able to fight
with two or three times their own number?

  I agree with you, for I think you right.

  And suppose that, before engaging, our citizens send an
embassy to one of the two cities, telling them what is the truth:
Silver and gold we neither have nor are permitted to have,
but you may; do you therefore come and help us in war, and
take the spoils of the other city: Who, on hearing these words,
would choose to fight against lean wiry dogs, rather than, with
the dogs on their side, against fat and tender sheep?

  That is not likely; and yet there might be a danger to the
poor State if the wealth of many States were to be gathered
into one.

  But how simple of you to use the term State at all of any
but our own!

  Why so?

  You ought to speak of other States in the plural number;
not one of them is a city, but many cities, as they say in the
game. For indeed any city, however small, is in fact divided
into two, one the city of the poor, the other of the rich; these
are at war with one another; and in either there are many
smaller divisions, and you would be altogether beside the mark
if you treated them all as a single State. But if you deal with
them as many, and give the wealth or power or persons of the
one to the others, you will always have a great many friends
and not many enemies. And your State, while the wise order
which has now been prescribed continues to prevail in her, will
be the greatest of States, I do not mean to say in reputation
or appearance, but in deed and truth, though she number not
more than 1,000 defenders. A single State which is her equal
you will hardly find, either among Hellenes or barbarians,
though many that appear to be as great and many times greater.

  That is most true, he said.

  And what, I said, will be the best limit for our rulers to fix
when they are considering the size of the State and the amount
of territory which they are to include, and beyond which they
will not go?

  What limit would you propose?

  I would allow the State to increase so far as is consistent
with unity; that, I think, is the proper limit.

  Very good, he said.

  Here then, I said, is another order which will have to be
conveyed to our guardians: Let our city be accounted neither
large nor small, but one and self-sufficing.

  And surely, said he, this is not a very severe order which
we impose upon them.

  And the other, said I, of which we were speaking before is
lighter still--I mean the duty of degrading the offspring of
the guardians when inferior, and of elevating into the rank of
guardians the offspring of the lower classes, when naturally
superior. The intention was, that, in the case of the citizens
generally, each individual should be put to the use for which
nature intended him, one to one work, and then every man
would do his own business, and be one and not many; and
so the whole city would be one and not many.

  Yes, he said; that is not so difficult.

  The regulations which we are prescribing, my good Adei-
mantus, are not, as might be supposed, a number of great prin-
ciples, but trifles all, if care be taken, as the saying is, of the
one great thing--a thing, however, which I would rather call,
not, great, but sufficient for our purpose.

  What may that be? he asked.

  Education, I said, and nurture: If our citizens are well edu-
cated, and grow into sensible men, they will easily see their
way through all these, as well as other matters which I omit;
such, for example, as marriage, the possession of women and
the procreation of children, which will all follow the general
principle that friends have all things in common, as the proverb
says.

  That will be the best way of settling them.

  Also, I said, the State, if once started well, moves with ac-
cumulating force like a wheel. For good nurture and educa-
tion implant good constitutions, and these good constitutions
taking root in a good education improve more and more, and
this improvement affects the breed in man as in other animals.

  Very possibly, he said.

  Then to sum up: This is the point to which, above all, the
attention of our rulers should be directed--that music and
gymnastics be preserved in their original form, and no innova-
tion made. They must do their utmost to maintain them in-
tact. And when anyone says that mankind most regard

  "The newest song which the singers have,"

they will be afraid that he may be praising, not new songs,
but a new kind of song; and this ought not to be praised, or
conceived to be the meaning of the poet; for any musical inno-
vation is full of danger to the whole State, and ought to be
prohibited. So Damon tells me, and I can quite believe him;
he says that when modes of music change, the fundamental
laws of the State always change with them.

  Yes, said Adeimantus; and you may add my suffrage to
Damon's and your own.

  Then, I said, our guardians must lay the foundations of their
fortress in music?

  Yes, he said; the lawlessness of which you speak too easily
steals in.

  Yes, I replied, in the form of amusement; and at first
sight it appears harmless.

  Why, yes, he said, and there is no harm; were it not that
little by little this spirit of license, finding a home, impercep-
tibly penetrates into manners and customs; whence, issuing
with greater force, it invades contracts between man and man,
and from contracts goes on to laws and constitutions, in utter
recklessness, ending at last, Socrates, by an overthrow of all
rights, private as well as public.

  Is that true? I said.

  That is my belief, he replied.

  Then, as I was saying, our youth should be trained from
the first in a stricter system, for if amusements become law-
less, and the youths themselves become lawless, they can never
grow up into well-conducted and virtuous citizens.

  Very true, he said.

  And when they have made a good beginning in play, and
by the help of music have gained the habit of good order,
then this habit of order, in a manner how unlike the lawless
play of the others! will accompany them in all their actions
and be a principle of growth to them, and if there be any
fallen places [a] [principle] in the State will raise
them up again.

  Very true, he said.

  Thus educated, they will invent for themselves any lesser
rules which their predecessors have altogether neglected.

  What do you mean?

  I mean such things as these:--when the young are to be
silent before their elders; how they are to show respect to
them by standing and making them sit; what honor is due
to parents; what garments or shoes are to be worn; the mode
of dressing the hair; deportment and manners in general.
You would agree with me?

  Yes.

  But there is, I think, small wisdom in legislating about such
matters--I doubt if it is ever done; nor are any precise writ-
ten enactments about them likely to be lasting.

  Impossible.

  It would seem, Adeimantus, that the direction in which edu-
cation starts a man, will determine his future life. Does not
like always attract like?

  To be sure.

  Until some one rare and grand result is reached which may
be good, and may be the reverse of good?

  That is not to be denied.

  And for this reason, I said, I shall not attempt to legis-
late further about them.

  Naturally enough, he replied.

  Well, and about the business of the agora, and the ordi-
nary dealings between man and man, or again about agree-
ments with artisans; about insult and injury, or the com-
mencement of actions, and the appointment of juries, what
would you say? there may also arise questions about any im-
positions and exactions of market and harbor dues which may
be required, and in general about the regulations of markets,
police, harbors, and the like.. But, O heavens! shall we con-
descend to legislate on any of these particulars?

  I think, he said, that there is no need to impose laws about
them on good men; what regulations are necessary they will
find out soon enough for themselves.

  Yes, I said, my friend, if God will only preserve to them
the laws which we have given them.

  And without divine help, said Adeimantus, they will go on
forever making and mending the laws and their lives in the
hope of attaining perfection.

  You would compare them, I said, to those invalids who,
having no self-restraint, will not leave off their habits of in-
temperance?

  Exactly.

  Yes, I said; and what a delightful life they lead! they
are always doctoring and increasing and complicating their
disorders, and always fancying that they will be cured by any
nostrum which anybody advises them to try.

  Such cases are very common, he said, with invalids of this
sort.

  Yes, I replied; and the charming thing is that they deem
him their worst enemy who tells them the truth, which is
simply that, unless they give up eating and drinking and
wenching and idling, nether drug nor cautery nor spell nor
amulet nor any other remedy will avail.

  Charming! he replied. I see nothing in going into a pas-
sion with a man who tells you what is right.

  These gentlemen, I said, do not seem to be in your good
graces.

  Assuredly not.

  Nor would you praise the behavior of States which act like
the men whom I was just now describing. For are there not
ill-ordered States in which the citizens are forbidden under
pain of death to alter the constitution; and yet he who most
sweetly courts those who live under this regime and indulges
them and fawns upon them and is skilful in anticipating and
gratifying their humors is held to be a great and good states-
man--do not these States resemble the persons whom I was
describing?

  Yes, he said; the States are as bad as the men; and I am
very far from praising them.

  But do you not admire, I said, the coolness and dexterity
of these ready ministers of political corruption?

  Yes, he said, I do; but not of all of them, for there are
some whom the applause of the multitude has deluded into
the belief that they are really statesmen, and these are not
much to be admired.

  What do you mean? I said; you should have more feeling
for them. When a man cannot measure, and a great many
others who cannot measure declare that he is four cubits high,
can he help believing what they say?

  Nay, he said, certainly not in that case.

  Well, then, do not be angry with them; for are they not
as good as a play, trying their hand at paltry reforms such
as I was describing; they are always fancying that by legisla-
tion they will make an end of frauds in contracts, and the
other rascalities which I was mentioning, not knowing that
they are in reality cutting off the heads of a hydra?

  Yes, he said; that is just what they are doing.

  I conceive, I said, that the true legislator will not trouble
himself with this class of enactments whether concerning laws
or the constitution either in an ill-ordered or in a well-
ordered State; for in the former they are quite useless, and in
the latter there will be no difficulty in devising them; and
many of them will naturally flow out of our previous regu-
lations.

  What, then, he said, is still remaining to us of the work
of legislation?

  Nothing to us, I replied; but to Apollo, the god of Delphi,
there remains the ordering of the greatest and noblest and
chiefest things of all.

  Which are they? he said.

  The institution of temples and sacrifices, and the entire ser-
vice of gods, demigods, and heroes; also the ordering of the
repositories of the dead, and the rites which have to be ob-
served by him who would propitiate the inhabitants of the
world below. These are matters of which we are ignorant
ourselves, and as founders of a city we should be unwise in
trusting them to any interpreter but our ancestral deity. He
is the god who sits in the centre, on the navel of the earth,
and he is the interpreter of religion to all mankind.

  You are right, and we will do as you propose.

  But where, amid all this, is justice? Son of Ariston, tell
me where. Now that our city has been made habitable, light
a candle and search, and get your brother and Polemarchus
and the rest of our friends to help, and let us see where in
it we can discover justice and where injustice, and in what
they differ from one another, and which of them the man
who would be happy should have for his portion, whether seen
or unseen by gods and men.

  Nonsense, said Glaucon: did you not promise to search
yourself, saying that for you not to help justice in her need
would be an impiety?

  I do not deny that I said so; and as you remind me, I will
be as good as my word; but you must join.

  We will, he replied.

  Well, then, I hope to make the discovery in this way: I
mean to begin with the assumption that our State, if rightly
ordered, is perfect.

  That is most certain.

  And being perfect, is therefore wise and valiant and tem-
perate and just.

  That is likewise clear.

  And whichever of these qualities we find in the State, the
one which is not found will be the residue?

  Very good.

  If there were four things, and we were searching for one
of them, wherever it might be, the one sought for might be
known to us from the first, and there would be no further
trouble; or we might know the other three first, and then the
fourth would clearly be the one left.

  Very true, he said.

  And is not a similar method to be pursued about the virtues,
which are also four in number?

  Clearly.

  First among the virtues found in the State, wisdom comes
into view, and in this I detect a certain peculiarity.

  What is that?

  The State which we have been describing is said to be wise
as being good in counsel?

  Very true.

  And good counsel is clearly a kind of knowledge, for not
by ignorance, but by knowledge, do men counsel well?

  Clearly.

  And the kinds of knowledge in a State are many and
diverse?

  Of course.

  There is the knowledge of the carpenter; but is that the
sort of knowledge which gives a city the title of wise and
good in counsel?

  Certainly not; that would only give a city the reputation
of skill in carpentering.

  Then a city is not to be called wise because possessing a
knowledge which counsels for the best about wooden imple-
ments?

  Certainly not.

  Nor by reason of a knowledge which advises about brazen
pots, he said, nor as possessing any other similar knowledge?

  Not by reason of any of them, he said.

  Nor yet by reason of a knowledge which cultivates the
earth; that would give the city the name of agricultural?

  Yes.

  Well, I said, and is there any knowledge in our recently
founded State among any of the citizens which advises, not
about any particular thing in the State, but about the whole,
and considers how a State can best deal with itself and with
other States?

  There certainly is.

  And what is this knowledge, and among whom is it found?
I asked.

  It is the knowledge of the guardians, he replied, and is
found among those whom we were just now describing as
perfect guardians.

  And what is the name which the city derives from the pos-
session of this sort of knowledge?

  The name of good in counsel and truly wise.

  And will there be in our city more of these true guardians
or more smiths?

  The smiths, he replied, will be far more numerous.

  Will not the guardians be the smallest of all the classes
who receive a name from the profession of some kind of
knowledge?

  Much the smallest.

  And so by reason of the smallest part or class, and of the
knowledge which resides in this presiding and ruling part of
itself, the whole State, being thus constituted according to
nature, will be wise; and this, which has the only knowledge
worthy to be called wisdom, has been ordained by nature to
be of all classes the least.

  Most true.

  Thus, then, I said, the nature and place in the State of one
of the four virtues have somehow or other been discovered.

  And, in my humble opinion, very satisfactorily discovered,
he replied.

  Again, I said, there is no difficulty in seeing the nature of
courage, and in what part that quality resides which gives the
name of courageous to the State.

  How do you mean?

  Why, I said, everyone who calls any State courageous or
cowardly, will be thinking of the part which fights and goes
out to war on the State's behalf.

  No one, he replied, would ever think of any other.

  The rest of the citizens may be courageous or may be
cowardly, but their courage or cowardice will not, as I con-
ceive, have the effect of making the city either the one or the
other.

  Certainly not.

  The city will be courageous in virtue of a portion of her-
self which preserves under all circumstances that opinion about
the nature of things to be feared and not to be feared in which
our legislator educated them; and this is what you term
courage.

  I should like to hear what you are saying once more, for
I do not think that I perfectly understand you.

  I mean that courage is a kind of salvation.

  Salvation of what?

  Of the opinion respecting things to be feared, what they
are and of what nature, which the law implants through edu-
cation; and I mean by the words "under all circumstances"
to intimate that in pleasure or in pain, or under the influence
of desire or fear, a man preserves, and does not lose this
opinion. Shall I give you an illustration?

  If you please.

  You know, I said, that dyers, when they want to dye wool
for making the true sea-purple, begin by selecting their white
color first; this they prepare and dress with much care and
pains, in order that the white ground may take the purple hue
in full perfection. The dyeing then proceeds; and whatever
is dyed in this manner becomes a fast color, and no washing
either with lyes or without them can take away the bloom.
But, when the ground has not been duly prepared, you will
have noticed how poor is the look either of purple or of any
other color.

  Yes, he said; I know that they have a washed-out and
ridiculous appearance.

  Then now, I said, you will understand what our object was
in selecting our soldiers, and educating them in music and
gymnastics; we were contriving influences which would pre-
pare them to take the dye of the laws in perfection, and the
color of their opinion about dangers and of every other opin-
ion was to be indelibly fixed by their nurture and training,
not to be washed away by such potent lyes as pleasure--
mightier agent far in washing the soul than any soda or lye;
or by sorrow, fear, and desire, the mightiest of all other sol-
vents. And this sort of universal saving power of true opin-
ion in conformity with law about real and false dangers I call
and maintain to be courage, unless you disagree.

  But I agree, he replied; for I suppose that you mean to
exclude mere uninstructed courage, such as that of a wild beast
or of a slave--this, in your opinion, is not the courage which
the law ordains, and ought to have another name.

  Most certainly.

  Then I may infer courage to be such as you describe?

  Why, yes, said I, you may, and if you add the words "of
a citizen," you will not be far wrong--hereafter, if you like,
we will carry the examination further, but at present we are
seeking, not for courage, but justice; and for the purpose of
our inquiry we have said enough.

  You are right, he replied.

  Two virtues remain to be discovered in the State--first,
temperance, and then justice, which is the end of our search.

  Very true.

  Now, can we find justice without troubling ourselves about
temperance?

  I do not know how that can be accomplished, he said, nor
do I desire that justice should be brought to light and temper-
ance lost sight of; and therefore I wish that you would do
me the favor of considering temperance first.

  Certainly, I replied, I should not be justified in refusing
your request.

  Then consider, he said.

  Yes, I replied; I will; and as far as I can at present see,
the virtue of temperance has more of the nature of harmony
and symphony than the preceding.

  How so? he asked.

  Temperance, I replied, is the ordering or controlling of cer-
tain pleasures and desires; this is curiously enough implied
in the saying of "a man being his own master;" and other
traces of the same notion may be found in language.

  No doubt, he said.

  There is something ridiculous in the expression "master of
himself;" for the master is also the servant and the servant
the master; and in all these modes of speaking the same per-
son is denoted.

  Certainly.

  The meaning is, I believe, that in the human soul there is
a better and also a worse principle; and when the better has
the worse under control, then a man is said to be master of
himself; and this is a term of praise: but when, owing to evil
education or association, the better principle, which is also
the smaller, is overwhelmed by the greater mass of the worse
--in this case he is blamed and is called the slave of self and
unprincipled.

  Yes, there is reason in that.

  And now, I said, look at our newly created State, and there
you will find one of these two conditions realized; for the
State, as you will acknowledge, may be justly called master
of itself, if the words "temperance" and "self-mastery" truly
express the rule of the better part over the worse.

  Yes, he said, I see that what you say is true.

  Let me further note that the manifold and complex pleas-
ures and desires and pains are generally found in children
and women and servants, and in the freemen so called who
are of the lowest and more numerous class.

  Certainly, he said.

  Whereas the simple and moderate desires which follow rea-
son, and are under the guidance of mind and true opinion,
are to be found only in a few, and those the best born and
best educated.

  Very true.
These two, as you may perceive, have a place in our State;
and the meaner desires of the many are held down by the
virtuous desires and wisdom of the few.

  That I perceive, he said.

  Then if there be any city which may be described as master
of its own pleasures and desires, and master of itself, ours
may claim such a designation?

  Certainly, he replied.

  It may also be called temperate, and for the same reasons?

  Yes.

  And if there be any State in which rulers and subjects will
be agreed as to the question who are to rule, that again will
be our State?

  Undoubtedly.

  And the citizens being thus agreed among themselves, in
which class will temperance be found--in the rulers or in the
subjects?

  In both, as I should imagine, he replied.

  Do you observe that we were not far wrong in our guess
that temperance was a sort of harmony?

  Why so?

  Why, because temperance is unlike courage and wisdom,
each of which resides in a part only, the one making the State
wise and the other valiant; not so temperance, which extends
to the whole, and runs through all the notes of the scale, and
produces a harmony of the weaker and the stronger and the
middle class, whether you suppose them to be stronger or
weaker in wisdom, or power, or numbers, or wealth, or any-
thing else. Most truly then may we deem temperance to be
the agreement of the naturally superior and inferior, as to the
right to rule of either, both in States and individuals.

  I entirely agree with you.

  And so, I said, we may consider three out of the four vir-
tues to have been discovered in our State. The last of those
qualities which make a State virtuous must be justice, if we
only knew what that was.

  The inference is obvious.

  The time then has arrived, Glaucon, when, like huntsmen,
we should surround the cover, and look sharp that justice
does not steal away, and pass out of sight and escape us; for
beyond a doubt she is somewhere in this country: watch
therefore and strive to catch a sight of her, and if you see
her first, let me know.

  Would that I could! but you should regard me rather as
a follower who has just eyes enough to see what you show
him--that is about as much as I am good for.

  Offer up a prayer with me and follow.

  I will, but you must show me the way.

  Here is no path, I said, and the wood is dark and perplex-
ing; still we must push on.

  Let us push on.

  Here I saw something: Halloo! I said, I begin to perceive
a track, and I believe that the quarry will not escape.

  Good news, he said.

  Truly, I said, we are stupid fellows.

  Why so?

  Why, my good sir, at the beginning of our inquiry, ages
ago, there was Justice tumbling out at our feet, and we never
saw her; nothing could be more ridiculous. Like people who
go about looking for what they have in their hands--that was
the way with us--we looked not at what we were seeking,
but at what was far off in the distance; and therefore, I sup-
pose, we missed her.

  What do you mean?

  I mean to say that in reality for a long time past we have
been talking of Justice, and have failed to recognize her.

  I grow impatient at the length of your exordium.
Well, then, tell me, I said, whether I am right or not: You
remember the original principle which we were always lay-
ing down at the foundation of the State, that one man should
practise one thing only, the thing to which his nature was
best adapted; now justice is this principle or a part of it.

  Yes, we often said that one man should do one thing only.

  Further, we affirmed that Justice was doing one's own busi-
ness, and not being a busybody; we said so again and again,
and many others have said the same to us.

  Yes, we said so.

  Then to do one's own business in a certain way may be
assumed to be justice. Can you tell me whence I derive this
inference?

  I cannot, but I should like to be told.

  Because I think that this is the only virtue which remains
in the State when the other virtues of temperance and cour-
age and wisdom are abstracted; and, that this is the ulti-
mate cause and condition of the existence of all of them,
and while remaining in them is also their preservative; and
we were saying that if the three were discovered by us, jus-
tice would be the fourth, or remaining one.

  That follows of necessity.

  If we are asked to determine which of these four qualities
by its presence contributes most to the excellence of the State,
whether the agreement of rulers and subjects, or the preser-
vation in the soldiers of the opinion which the law ordains
about the true nature of dangers, or wisdom and watchfulness
in the rulers, or whether this other which I am mentioning,
and which is found in children and women, slave and freeman,
artisan, ruler, subject--the quality, I mean, of everyone doing
his own work, and not being a busybody, would claim the
palm--the question is not so easily answered.

  Certainly, he replied, there would be a difficulty in saying
which.

  Then the power of each individual in the State to do his
own work appears to compete with the other political virtues,
wisdom, temperance, courage.

  Yes, he said.

  And the virtue which enters into this competition is justice?

  Exactly.

  Let us look at the question from another point of view:
Are not the rulers in a State those to whom you would in-
trust the office of determining suits-at-law?

  Certainly.

  And are suits decided on any other ground but that a man
may neither take what is another's, nor be deprived of what
is his own?

  Yes; that is their principle.

  Which is a just principle?

  Yes.

  Then on this view also justice will be admitted to be the
having and doing what is a man's own, and belongs to him?

  Very true.

  Think, now, and say whether you agree with me or not.
Suppose a carpenter to be doing the business of a cobbler,
or a cobbler of a carpenter; and suppose them to exchange
their implements or their duties, or the same person to be
doing the work of both, or whatever be the change; do you
think that any great harm would result to the State?

  Not much.

  But when the cobbler or any other man whom nature de-
signed to be a trader, having his heart lifted up by wealth or
strength or the number of his followers, or any like advan-
tage, attempts to force his way into the class of warriors, or
a warrior into that of legislators and guardians, for which he
is unfitted, and either to take the implements or the duties of
the other; or when one man is trader, legislator, and warrior
all in one, then I think you will agree with me in saying that
this interchange and this meddling of one with another is the
ruin of the State.

  Most true.
Seeing, then, I said, that there are three distinct classes, any
meddling of one with another, or the change of one into an-
other, is the greatest harm to the State, and may be most
justly termed evil-doing?

  Precisely.

  And the greatest degree of evil-doing to one's own city would
be termed by you injustice?

  Certainly.
This, then, is injustice; and on the other hand when the
trader, the auxiliary, and the guardian each do their own busi-
ness, that is justice, and will make the city just.

  I agree with you.

  We will not, I said, be over-positive as yet; but if, on trial,
this conception of justice be verified in the individual as well
as in the State, there will be no longer any room for doubt;
if it be not verified, we must have a fresh inquiry. First let
us complete the old investigation, which we began, as you re-
member, under the impression that, if we could previously ex-
amine justice on the larger scale, there would be less difficulty
in discerning her in the individual. That larger example ap-
peared to be the State, and accordingly we constructed as
good a one as we could, knowing well that in the good State
justice would be found. Let the discovery which we made be
now applied to the individual--if they agree, we shall be sat-
isfied; or, if there be a difference in the individual, we will
come back to the State and have another trial of the theory.
The friction of the two when rubbed together may possibly
strike a light in which justice will shine forth, and the vision
which is then revealed we will fix in our souls.

  That will be in regular course; let us do as you say.

  I proceeded to ask: When two things, a greater and less, are
called by the same name, are they like or unlike in so far as
they are called the same?

  Like, he replied.

  The just man then, if we regard the idea of justice only,
will be like the just State?

  He will.

  And a State was thought by us to be just when the three
classes in the State severally did their own business; and also
thought to be temperate and valiant and wise by reason of
certain other affections and qualities of these same classes?

  True, he said.

  And so of the individual; we may assume that he has the
same three principles in his own soul which are found in the
State; and he may be rightly described in the same terms,
because he is affected in the same manner?

  Certainly, he said.

  Once more, then, O my friend, we have alighted upon an
easy question--whether the soul has these three principles or
not?

  An easy question! Nay, rather, Socrates, the proverb holds
that hard is the good.

  Very true, I said; and I do not think that the method which
we are employing is at all adequate to the accurate solution
of this question; the true method is another and a longer one.
Still we may arrive at a solution not below the level of the
previous inquiry.

  May we not be satisfied with that? he said; under the cir-
cumstances, I am quite content.
I, too, I replied, shall be extremely well satisfied.

  Then faint not in pursuing the speculation, he said.

  Must we not acknowledge, I said, that in each of us there
are the same principles and habits which there are in the State;
and that from the individual they pass into the State?--how
else can they come there? Take the quality of passion or spirit;
it would be ridiculous to imagine that this quality, when
found in States, is not derived from the individuals who are
supposed to possess it, e.g., the Thracians, Scythians, and in
general the Northern nations; and the same may be said of
the love of knowledge, which is the special characteristic of our
part of the world, or of the love of money, which may, with
equal truth, be attributed to the Phoenicians and Egyptians.

  Exactly so, he said.

  There is no difficulty in understanding this.

  None whatever.

  But the question is not quite so easy when we proceed to
ask whether these principles are three or one; whether, that
is to say, we learn with one part of our nature, are angry with
another, and with a third part desire the satisfaction of our
natural appetites; or whether the whole soul comes into play
in each sort of action--to determine that is the difficulty.

  Yes, he said; there lies the difficulty.

  Then let us now try and determine whether they are the
same or different.

  How can we? he asked.

  I replied as follows: The same thing clearly cannot act or
be acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing
at the same time, in contrary ways; and therefore whenever
this contradiction occurs in things apparently the same, we
know that they are really not the same, but different.

  Good.

  For example, I said, can the same thing be at rest and in
motion at the same time in the same part?

  Impossible.

  Still, I said, let us have a more precise statement of terms,
lest we should hereafter fall out by the way. Imagine the
case of a man who is standing and also moving his hands and
his head, and suppose a person to say that one and the same
person is in motion and at rest at the same moment--to such
a mode of speech we should object, and should rather say that
one part of him is in motion while another is at rest.

  Very true.

  And suppose the objector to refine still further, and to draw
the nice distinction that not only parts of tops, but whole tops,
when they spin round with their pegs fixed on the spot, are
at rest and in motion at the same time (and he may say the
same of anything which revolves in the same spot), his ob-
jection would not be admitted by us, because in such cases
things are not at rest and in motion in the same parts of them-
selves; we should rather say that they have both an axis and
a circumference; and that the axis stands still, for there is
no deviation from the perpendicular; and that the circum-
ference goes round. But if, while revolving, the axis inclines
either to the right or left, forward or backward, then in no
point of view can they be at rest.

  That is the correct mode of describing them, he replied.

  Then none of these objections will confuse us, or incline
us to believe that the same thing at the same time, in the same
part or in relation to the same thing, can act or be acted upon
in contrary ways.

  Certainly not, according to my way of thinking.

  Yet, I said, that we may not be compelled to examine all
such objections, and prove at length that they are untrue, let
us assume their absurdity, and go forward on the understand-
ing that hereafter, if this assumption turn out to be untrue, all
the consequences which follow shall be withdrawn.

  Yes, he said, that will be the best way.

  Well, I said, would you not allow that assent and dissent,
desire and aversion, attraction and repulsion, are all of them
opposites, whether they are regarded as active or passive (for
that makes no difference in the fact of their opposition)?

  Yes, he said, they are opposites.

  Well, I said, and hunger and thirst, and the desires in gen-
eral, and again willing and wishing--all these you would refer
to the classes already mentioned. You would say--would you
not?--that the soul of him who desires is seeking after the
object of his desire; or that he is drawing to himself the thing
which he wishes to possess: or again, when a person wants
anything to be given him, his mind, longing for the realiza-
tion of his desire, intimates his wish to have it by a nod of
assent, as if he had been asked a question?

  Very true.

  And what would you say of unwillingness and dislike and
the absence of desire; should not these be referred to the op-
posite class of repulsion and rejection?

  Certainly.

  Admitting this to be true of desire generally, let us suppose
a particular class of desires, and out of these we will select
hunger and thirst, as they are termed, which are the most
obvious of them?

  Let us take that class, he said.

  The object of one is food, and of the other drink?

  Yes.

  And here comes the point: is not thirst the desire which
the soul has of drink, and of drink only; not of drink qualified
by anything else; for example, warm or cold, or much or
little, or, in a word, drink of any particular sort: but if the
thirst be accompanied by heat, then the desire is of cold drink;
or, if accompanied by cold, then of warm drink; or, if the
thirst be excessive, then the drink which is desired will be ex-
cessive; or, if not great, the quantity of drink will also be
small: but thirst pure and simple will desire drink pure and
simple, which is the natural satisfaction of thirst, as food is
of hunger?

  Yes, he said; the simple desire is, as you say, in every case
of the simple object, and the qualified desire of the qualified
object.

  But here a confusion may arise; and I should wish to guard
against an opponent starting up and saying that no man de-
sires drink only, but good drink, or food only, but good food;
for good is the universal object of desire, and thirst being a
desire, will necessarily be thirst after good drink; and the
same is true of every other desire.

  Yes, he replied, the opponent might have something to say.

  Nevertheless I should still maintain, that of relatives some
have a quality attached to either term of the relation; others
are simple and have their correlatives simple.

  I do not know what you mean.

  Well, you know of course that the greater is relative to the
less?

  Certainly.

  And the much greater to the much less?

  Yes.

  And the sometime greater to the sometime less, and the
greater that is to be to the less that is to be?

  Certainly, he said.

  And so of more or less, and of other correlative terms, such
as the double and the half, or, again, the heavier and the lighter,
the swifter and the slower; and of hot and cold, and of any
other relatives; is not this true of all of them?

  Yes.

  And does not the same principle hold in the sciences? The
object of science is knowledge (assuming that to be the true
definition), but the object of a particular science is a particu-
lar kind of knowledge; I mean, for example, that the science
of house-building is a kind of knowledge which is defined and

distinguished from other kinds and is therefore termed archi-
tecture.

  Certainly.

  Because it has a particular quality which no other has?

  Yes.

  And it has this particular quality because it has an object
of a particular kind; and this is true of the other arts and
sciences?

  Yes.

  Now, then, if I have made myself clear, you will under-
stand my original meaning in what I said about relatives. My
meaning was, that if one term of a relation is taken alone,
the other is taken alone; if one term is qualified, the other
is also qualified. I do not mean to say that relatives may
not be disparate, or that the science of health is healthy, or
of disease necessarily diseased, or that the sciences of good
and evil are therefore good and evil; but only that, when the
term "science" is no longer used absolutely, but has a quali-
fied object which in this case is the nature of health and dis-
ease, it becomes defined, and is hence called not merely sci-
ence, but the science of medicine.

  I quite understand, and, I think, as you do.

  Would you not say that thirst is one of these essentially
relative terms, having clearly a relation--

  Yes, thirst is relative to drink.

  And a certain kind of thirst is relative to a certain kind of
drink; but thirst taken alone is neither of much nor little,
nor of good nor bad, nor of any particular kind of drink, but
of drink only?

  Certainly.

  Then the soul of the thirsty one, in so far as he is thirsty,
desires only drink; for this he yearns and tries to obtain it?

  That is plain.

  And if you suppose something which pulls a thirsty soul
away from drink, that must be different from the thirsty prin-
ciple which draws him like a beast to drink; for, as we were
saying, the same thing cannot at the same time with the same
part of itself act in contrary ways about the same.

  Impossible.

  No more than you can say that the hands of the archer
push and pull the bow at the same time, but what you say
is that one hand pushes and the other pulls.

  Exactly so, he replied.

  And might a man be thirsty, and yet unwilling to drink?

  Yes, he said, it constantly happens.

  And in such a case what is one to say? Would you not
say that there was something in the soul bidding a man to
drink, and something else forbidding him, which is other and
stronger than the principle which bids him?

  I should say so.

  And the forbidding principle is derived from reason, and
that which bids and attracts proceeds from passion and dis-
ease?

  Clearly.

  Then we may fairly assume that they are two, and that they
differ from one another; the one with which a man reasons,
we may call the rational principle of the soul; the other, with
which he loves, and hungers, and thirsts, and feels the flutter-
ings of any other desire, may be termed the irrational or ap-
petitive, the ally of sundry pleasures and satisfactions?

  Yes, he said, we may fairly assume them to be different.

  Then let us finally determine that there are two principles
existing in the soul. And what of passion, or spirit? Is it
a third, or akin to one of the preceding?

  I should be inclined to say--akin to desire.

  Well, I said, there is a story which I remember to have
heard, and in which I put faith. The story is, that Leontius,
the son of Aglaion, coming up one day from the Piraeus, under
the north wall on the outside, observed some dead bodies
lying on the ground at the place of execution. He felt a de-
sire to see them, and also a dread and abhorrence of them;
for a time he struggled and covered his eyes, but at length the
desire got the better of him; and forcing them open, he ran
up to the dead bodies, saying, Look, ye wretches, take your
fill of the fair sight.

  I have heard the story myself, he said.

  The moral of the tale is, that anger at times goes to war
with desire, as though they were two distinct things.

  Yes; that is the meaning, he said.

  And are there not many other cases in which we observe
that when a man's desires violently prevail over his reason,
he reviles himself, and is angry at the violence within him,
and that in this struggle, which is like the struggle of factions
in a State, his spirit is on the side of his reason; but for the
passionate or spirited element to take part with the desires
when reason decides that she should not be opposed, is a sort
of thing which I believe that you never observed occurring
in yourself, nor, as I should imagine, in anyone else?

  Certainly not.

  Suppose that a man thinks he has done a wrong to another,
the nobler he is, the less able is he to feel indignant at any
suffering, such as hunger, or cold, or any other pain which
the injured person may inflict upon him--these he deems to
be just, and, as I say, his anger refuses to be excited by them.

  True, he said.

  But when he thinks that he is the sufferer of the wrong,
then he boils and chafes, and is on the side of what he be-
lieves to be justice; and because he suffers hunger or cold
or other pain he is only the more determined to persevere and
conquer. His noble spirit will not be quelled until he either
slays or is slain; or until he hears the voice of the shepherd,
that is, reason, bidding his dog bark no more.

  The illustration is perfect, he replied; and in our State, as
we were saying, the auxiliaries were to be dogs, and to hear
the voice of the rulers, who are their shepherds.

  I perceive, I said, that you quite understand me; there is,
however, a further point which I wish you to consider.

  What point?

  You remember that passion or spirit appeared at first sight
to be a kind of desire, but now we should say quite the con-
trary; for in the conflict of the soul spirit is arrayed on the
side of the rational principle.

  Most assuredly.

  But a further question arises: Is passion different from
reason also, or only a kind of reason; in which latter case,
instead of three principles in the soul, there will only be two,
the rational and the concupiscent; or rather, as the State was
composed of three classes, traders, auxiliaries, counsellors, so
may there not be in the individual soul a third element which
is passion or spirit, and when not corrupted by bad educa-
tion is the natural auxiliary of reason?

  Yes, he said, there must be a third.

  Yes, I replied, if passion, which has already been shown
to be different from desire, turn out also to be different from
reason.

  But that is easily proved: We may observe even in young
children that they are full of spirit almost as soon as they
are born, whereas some of them never seem to attain to the
use of reason, and most of them late enough.

  Excellent, I said, and you may see passion equally in brute
animals, which is a further proof of the truth of what you are
saying. And we may once more appeal to the words of Homer,
which have been already quoted by us,

"He smote his breast, and thus rebuked his soul;"
for in this verse Homer has clearly supposed the power which
reasons about the better and worse to be different from the
unreasoning anger which is rebuked by it.

  Very true, he said.

  And so, after much tossing, we have reached land, and are
fairly agreed that the same principles which exist in the State
exist also in the individual, and that they are three in number.

  Exactly.

  Must we not then infer that the individual is wise in the
same way, and in virtue of the same quality which makes the
State wise?

  Certainly.

  Also that the same quality which constitutes courage in the
State constitutes courage in the individual, and that both the
State and the individual bear the same relation to all the other
virtues?

  Assuredly.

  And the individual will be acknowledged by us to be just
in the same way in which the State is just?

  That follows of course.

  We cannot but remember that the justice of the State con-
sisted in each of the three classes doing the work of its own
class?

  We are not very likely to have forgotten, he said.

  We must recollect that the individual in whom the several
qualities of his nature do their own work will be just, and
will do his own work?

  Yes, he said, we must remember that too.

  And ought not the rational principle, which is wise, and
has the care of the whole soul, to rule, and the passionate or
spirited principle to be the subject and ally?

  Certainly.

  And, as we were saying, the united influence of music and
gymnastics will bring them into accord, nerving and sustaining
the reason with noble words and lessons, and moderating and
soothing and civilizing the wildness of passion by harmony
and rhythm?

  Quite true, he said.

  And these two, thus nurtured and educated, and having
learned truly to know their own functions, will rule over the
concupiscent, which in each of us is the largest part of the
soul and by nature most insatiable of gain; over this they
will keep guard, lest, waxing great and strong with the fulness
of bodily pleasures, as they are termed, the concupiscent soul,
no longer confined to her own sphere, should attempt to en-
slave and rule those who are not her natural-born subjects,
and overturn the whole life of man?

  Very true, he said.

  Both together will they not be the best defenders of the
whole soul and the whole body against attacks from without;
the one counselling, and the other fighting under his leader,
and courageously executing his commands and counsels?

  True.

  And he is to be deemed courageous whose spirit retains in
pleasure and in pain the commands of reason about what he
ought or ought not to fear?

  Right, he replied.

  And him we call wise who has in him that little part which
rules, and which proclaims these commands; that part too
being supposed to have a knowledge of what is for the in-
terest of each of the three parts and of the whole?

  Assuredly.

  And would you not say that he is temperate who has these
same elements in friendly harmony, in whom the one ruling
principle of reason, and the two subject ones of spirit and de-
sire, are equally agreed that reason ought to rule, and do not
rebel?

  Certainly, he said, that is the true account of temperance
whether in the State or individual.

  And surely, I said, we have explained again and again how
and by virtue of what quality a man will be just.

  That is very certain.

  And is justice dimmer in the individual, and is her form
different, or is she the same which we found her to be in the
State?

  There is no difference, in my opinion, he said.

  Because, if any doubt is still lingering in our minds, a few
commonplace instances will satisfy us of the truth of what I
am saying.

  What sort of instances do you mean?

  If the case is put to us, must we not admit that the just
State, or the man who is trained in the principles of such a
State, will be less likely than the unjust to make away with a
deposit of gold or silver? Would anyone deny this?

  No one, he replied.

  Will the just man or citizen ever be guilty of sacrilege or
theft, or treachery either to his friends or to his country?

  Never.

  Neither will he ever break faith where there have been oaths
or agreements.

  Impossible.

  No one will be less likely to commit adultery, or to dishonor
his father and mother, or to fail in his religious duties?

  No one.

  And the reason is that each part of him is doing its own
business, whether in ruling or being ruled?

  Exactly so.

  Are you satisfied, then, that the quality which makes such
men and such States is justice, or do you hope to discover
some other?

  Not I, indeed.

  Then our dream has been realized; and the suspicion which
we entertained at the beginning of our work of construction,
that some divine power must have conducted us to a primary
form of justice, has now been verified?

  Yes, certainly.

  And the division of labor which required the carpenter and
the shoemaker and the rest of the citizens to be doing each his
own business, and not another's, was a shadow of justice, and
for that reason it was of use?

  Clearly.

  But in reality justice was such as we were describing, being
concerned, however, not with the outward man, but with the
inward, which is the true self and concernment of man: for the
just man does not permit the several elements within him to
interfere with one another, or any of them to do the work of
others--he sets in order his own inner life, and is his own mas-
ter and his own law, and at peace with himself; and when he
has bound together the three principles within him, which may
be compared to the higher, lower, and middle notes of the scale,
and the intermediate intervals--when he has bound all these
together, and is no longer many, but has become one entirely
temperate and perfectly adjusted nature, then he proceeds to
act, if he has to act, whether in a matter of property, or in
the treatment of the body, or in some affair of politics or private
business; always thinking and calling that which preserves and
co-operates with this harmonious condition just and good
action, and the knowledge which presides over it wisdom, and
that which at any time impairs this condition he will call unjust
action, and the opinion which presides over it ignorance.

  You have said the exact truth, Socrates.

  Very good; and if we were to affirm that we had discovered
the just man and the just State, and the nature of justice in
each of them, we should not be telling a falsehood?

  Most certainly not.

  May we say so, then?

  Let us say so.

  And now, I said, injustice has to be considered.

  Clearly.

  Must not injustice be a strife which arises among the three
principles--a meddlesomeness, and interference, and rising up
of a part of the soul against the whole, an assertion of unlaw-
ful authority, which is made by a rebellious subject against a
true prince, of whom he is the natural vassal--what is all this
confusion and delusion but injustice, and intemperance, and
cowardice, and ignorance, and every form of vice?

  Exactly so.

  And if the nature of justice and injustice be known, then
the meaning of acting unjustly and being unjust, or, again, of
acting justly, will also be perfectly clear?

  What do you mean? he said.

  Why, I said, they are like disease and health; being in the
soul just what disease and health are in the body.

  How so? he said.

  Why, I said, that which is healthy causes health, and that
which is unhealthy causes disease.

  Yes.

  And just actions cause justice, and unjust actions cause
injustice?

  That is certain.

  And the creation of health is the institution of a natural order
and government of one by another in the parts of the body; and
the creation of disease is the production of a state of things at
variance with this natural order?

  True.

  And is not the creation of justice the institution of a natural
order and government of one by another in the parts of the
soul, and the creation of injustice the production of a state of
things at variance with the natural order?

  Exactly so, he said.

  Then virtue is the health, and beauty, and well-being of the
soul, and vice the disease, and weakness, and deformity, of the
same?

  True.

  And do not good practices lead to virtue, and evil practices
to vice?

  Assuredly.

  Still our old question of the comparative advantage of justice
and injustice has not been answered: Which is the more profit-
able, to be just and act justly and practise virtue, whether seen
or unseen of gods and men, or to be unjust and act unjustly, if
only unpunished and unreformed?

  In my judgment, Socrates, the question has now become
ridiculous. We know that, when the bodily constitution is
gone, life is no longer endurable, though pampered with all
kinds of meats and drinks, and having all wealth and all power;
and shall we be told that when the very essence of the vital
principle is undermined and corrupted, life is still worth having
to a man, if only he be allowed to do whatever he likes with
the single exception that he is not to acquire justice and virtue,
or to escape from injustice and vice; assuming them both to be
such as we have described?

  Yes, I said, the question is, as you say, ridiculous. Still,
as we are near the spot at which we may see the truth in the
clearest manner with our own eyes, let us not faint by the way.

  Certainly not, he replied.

  Come up hither, I said, and behold the various forms of vice,
those of them, I mean, which are worth looking at.

  I am following you, he replied: proceed.

  I said: The argument seems to have reached a height from
which, as from some tower of speculation, a man may look
down and see that virtue is one, but that the forms of vice are
innumerable; there being four special ones which are deserving
of note.

  What do you mean? he said.

  I mean, I replied, that there appear to be as many forms of
the soul as there are distinct forms of the State.

  How many?

  There are five of the State, and five of the soul, I said.

  What are they?

  The first, I said, is that which we have been describing, and
which may be said to have two names, monarchy and aristoc-
racy, according as rule is exercised by one distinguished man
or by many.

  True, he replied.

  But I regard the two names as describing one form only;
for whether the government is in the hands of one or many,
if the governors have been trained in the manner which we
have supposed, the fundamental laws of the State will be
maintained.

  That is true, he replied.


                         BOOK V
               ON MATRIMONY AND PHILOSOPHY

(SOCRATES, GLAUCON, ADEIMANTUS.)

  SUCH is the good and true City or State, and the good and
true man is of the same pattern; and if this is right every
other is wrong; and the evil is one which affects not only
the ordering of the State, but also the regulation of the indi-
vidual soul, and is exhibited in four forms.

  What are they? he said.

  I was proceeding to tell the order in which the four evil
forms appeared to me to succeed one another, when Polemar-
chus, who was sitting a little way off, just beyond Adeimantus,
began to whisper to him: stretching forth his hand, he took
hold of the upper part of his coat by the shoulder, and drew
him toward him, leaning forward himself so as to be quite close
and saying something in his ear, of which I only caught the
words, "Shall we let him off, or what shall we do?"

  Certainly not, said Adeimantus, raising his voice.

  Who is it, I said, whom you are refusing to let off?

  You, he said.

  I repeated, Why am I especially not to be let off?

  Why, he said, we think that you are lazy, and mean to cheat
us out of a whole chapter which is a very important part of
the story; and you fancy that we shall not notice your airy way
of proceeding; as if it were self-evident to everybody, that in
the matter of women and children "friends have all things in
common."

  And was I not right, Adeimantus?

  Yes, he said; but what is right in this particular case, like
everything else, requires to be explained; for community may
be of many kinds. Please, therefore, to say what sort of com-
munity you mean. We have been long expecting that you
would tell us something about the family life of your citizens--
how they will bring children into the world, and rear them
when they have arrived, and, in general, what is the nature of
this community of women and children--for we are of opinion
that the right or wrong management of such matters will have
a great and paramount influence on the State for good or for
evil. And now, since the question is still undetermined, and
you are taking in hand another State, we have resolved, as you
heard, not to let you go until you give an account of all this.

  To that resolution, said Glaucon, you may regard me as say-
ing: Agreed.

  And without more ado, said Thrasymachus, you may con-
sider us all to be equally agreed.

  I said, You know not what you are doing in thus assailing
me: What an argument are you raising about the State! Just
as I thought that I had finished, and was only too glad that I
had laid this question to sleep, and was reflecting how fortu-
nate I was in your acceptance of what I then said, you ask me
to begin again at the very foundation, ignorant of what a hor-
net's nest of words you are stirring. Now I foresaw this gath-
ering trouble, and avoided it.

  For what purpose do you conceive that we have come here,
said Thrasymachus--to look for gold, or to hear discourse?

  Yes, but discourse should have a limit.

  Yes, Socrates, said Glaucon, and the whole of life is the only
limit which wise men assign to the hearing of such discourses.
But never mind about us; take heart yourself and answer the
question in your own way: What sort of community of women
and children is this which is to prevail among our guardians?
and how shall we manage the period between birth and educa-
tion, which seems to require the greatest care? Tell us how
these things will be.

  Yes, my simple friend, but the answer is the reverse of easy;
many more doubts arise about this than about our previous con-
clusions. For the practicability of what is said may be doubted;
and looked at in another point of view, whether the scheme, if
ever so practicable, would be for the best, is also doubtful.
Hence I feel a reluctance to approach the subject, lest our as-
piration, my dear friend, should turn out to be a dream only.

  Fear not, he replied, for your audience will not be hard upon
you; they are not sceptical or hostile.

  I said: My good friend, I suppose that you mean to encour-
age me by these words.

  Yes, he said.

  Then let me tell you that you are doing just the reverse; the
encouragement which you offer would have been all very well
had I myself believed that I knew what I was talking about.
To declare the truth about matters of high interest which a man
honors and loves, among wise men who love him, need occasion
no fear or faltering in his mind; but to carry on an argument
when you are yourself only a hesitating inquirer, which is my
condition, is a dangerous and slippery thing; and the danger
is not that I shall be laughed at (of which the fear would be
childish), but that I shall miss the truth where I have most
need to be sure of my footing, and drag my friends after me
in my fall. And I pray Nemesis not to visit upon me the words
which I am going to utter. For I do indeed believe that to be
an involuntary homicide is a less crime than to be a deceiver
about beauty, or goodness, or justice, in the matter of laws.
And that is a risk which I would rather run among enemies
than among friends; and therefore you do well to encourage
me.

  Glaucon laughed and said: Well, then, Socrates, in case
you and your argument do us any serious injury you shall be
acquitted beforehand of the homicide, and shall not be held
to be a deceiver; take courage then and speak.

  Well, I said, the law says that when a man is acquitted he
is free from guilt, and what holds at law may hold in argument.

  Then why should you mind?

  Well, I replied, I suppose that I must retrace my steps and
say what I perhaps ought to have said before in the proper
place. The part of the men has been played out, and now
properly enough comes the turn of the women. Of them I will
proceed to speak, and the more readily since I am invited by
you.

  For men born and educated like our citizens, the only way,
in my opinion, of arriving at a right conclusion about the pos-
session and use of women and children is to follow the path
on which we originally started, when we said that the men
were to be the guardians and watch-dogs of the herd.

  True.

  Let us further suppose the birth and education of our women
to be subject to similar or nearly similar regulations; then we
shall see whether the result accords with our design.

  What do you mean?

  What I mean may be put into the form of a question, I said:
Are dogs divided into he's and she's, or do they both share
equally in hunting and in keeping watch and in the other duties
of dogs? or do we intrust to the males the entire and exclusive
care of the flocks, while we leave the females at home, under
the idea that the bearing and the suckling of their puppies are
labor enough for them?

  No, he said, they share alike; the only difference between
them is that the males are stronger and the females weaker.

  But can you use different animals for the same purpose, un-
less they are bred and fed in the same way?

  You cannot.

  Then, if women are to have the same duties as men, they
must have the same nurture and education?

  Yes.

  The education which was assigned to the men was music and
gymnastics.
Yes.

  Then women must be taught music and gymnastics and also
the art of war, which they must practise like the men?

  That is the inference, I suppose.

  I should rather expect, I said, that several of our proposals,
if they are carried out, being unusual, may appear ridiculous.

  No doubt of it.

  Yes, and the most ridiculous thing of all will be the sight
of women naked in the palaestra, exercising with the men, es-
pecially when they are no longer young; they certainly will not
be a vision of beauty, any more than the enthusiastic old men
who, in spite of wrinkles and ugliness, continue to frequent
the gymnasia.

  Yes, indeed, he said: according to present notions the pro-
posal would be thought ridiculous.

  But then, I said, as we have determined to speak our minds,
we must not fear the jests of the wits which will be directed
against this sort of innovation; how they will talk of women's
attainments, both in music and gymnastics, and above all about
their wearing armor and riding upon horseback!

  Very true, he replied.
Yet, having begun, we must go forward to the rough places
of the law; at the same time begging of these gentlemen for
once in their life to be serious. Not long ago, as we shall re-
mind them, the Hellenes were of the opinion, which is still
generally received among the barbarians, that the sight of a
naked man was ridiculous and improper; and when first the
Cretans, and then the Lacedaemonians, introduced the custom,
the wits of that day might equally have ridiculed the innova-
tion.

  No doubt.

  But when experience showed that to let all things be un-
covered was far better than to cover them up, and the ludicrous
effect to the outward eye had vanished before the better princi-
ple which reason asserted, then the man was perceived to be a
fool who directs the shafts of his ridicule at any other sight but
that of folly and vice, or seriously inclines to weigh the beauti-
ful by any other standard but that of the good.

  Very true, he replied.

  First, then, whether the question is to be put in jest or in
earnest, let us come to an understanding about the nature of
woman: Is she capable of sharing either wholly or partially
in the actions of men, or not at all? And is the art of war one
of those arts in which she can or cannot share? That will
be the best way of commencing the inquiry, and will probably
lead to the fairest conclusion.

  That will be much the best way.

  Shall we take the other side first and begin by arguing
against ourselves? in this manner the adversary's position will
not be undefended.

  Why not? he said.

  Then let us put a speech into the mouths of our opponents.
They will say: "Socrates and Glaucon, no adversary need
convict you, for you yourselves, at the first foundation of the
State, admitted the principle that everybody was to do the one
work suited to his own nature." And certainly, if I am not
mistaken, such an admission was made by us. "And do not
the natures of men and women differ very much indeed?"
And we shall reply, Of course they do. Then we shall be
asked, "Whether the tasks assigned to men and to women
should not be different, and such as are agreeable to their differ-
ent natures?" Certainly they should. "But if so, have you
not fallen into a serious inconsistency in saying that men and
women, whose natures are so entirely different, ought to per-
form the same actions?" What defence will you make for us,
my good sir, against anyone who offers these objections?

  That is not an easy question to answer when asked suddenly;
and I shall and I do beg of you to draw out the case on our side.

  These are the objections, Glaucon, and there are many others
of a like kind, which I foresaw long ago; they made me afraid
and reluctant to take in hand any law about the possession and
nurture of women and children.

  By Zeus, he said, the problem to be solved is anything but
easy.
Why, yes, I said, but the fact is that when a man is out of
his depth, whether he has fallen into a little swimming-bath
or into mid-ocean, he has to swim all the same.

  Very true.

  And must not we swim and try to reach the shore--we will
hope that Arion's dolphin or some other miraculous help may
save us?

  I suppose so, he said.
Well, then, let us see if any way of escape can be found.
We acknowledged--did we not?--that different natures ought
to have different pursuits, and that men's and women's natures
are different. And now what are we saying?--that different
natures ought to have the same pursuits--this is the inconsist-
ency which is charged upon us.

  Precisely.

  Verily, Glaucon, I said, glorious is the power of the art of
contradiction!

  Why do you say so?

  Because I think that many a man falls into the practice
against his will. When he thinks that he is reasoning he is
really disputing, just because he cannot define and divide, and
so know that of which he is speaking; and he will pursue a
merely verbal opposition in the spirit of contention and not of
fair discussion.

  Yes, he replied, such is very often the case; but what has
that to do with us and our argument?

  A great deal; for there is certainly a danger of our getting
unintentionally into a verbal opposition.

  In what way?
Why we valiantly and pugnaciously insist upon the verbal
truth, that different natures ought to have different pursuits,
but we never considered at all what was the meaning of same-
ness or difference of nature, or why we distinguished them
when we assigned different pursuits to different natures and
the same to the same natures.

  Why, no, he said, that was never considered by us.

  I said: Suppose that by way of illustration we were to ask
the question whether there is not an opposition in nature be-
tween bald men and hairy men; and if this is admitted by us,
then, if bald men are cobblers, we should forbid the hairy men
to be cobblers, and conversely?

  That would be a jest, he said.

  Yes, I said, a jest; and why? because we never meant when
we constructed the State, that the opposition of natures should
extend to every difference, but only to those differences which
affected the pursuit in which the individual is engaged; we
should have argued, for example, that a physician and one who
is in mind a physician may be said to have the same nature.

  True.

  Whereas the physician and the carpenter have different
natures?

  Certainly.

  And if, I said, the male and female sex appear to differ in
their fitness for any art or pursuit, we should say that such
pursuit or art ought to be assigned to one or the other of them;
but if the difference consists only in women bearing and men
begetting children, this does not amount to a proof that a
woman differs from a man in respect of the sort of education
she should receive; and we shall therefore continue to main-
tain that our guardians and their wives ought to have the same
pursuits.

  Very true, he said.

  Next, we shall ask our opponent how, in reference to any
of the pursuits or arts of civic life, the nature of a woman dif-
fers from that of a man?

  That will be quite fair.

  And perhaps he, like yourself, will reply that to give a suffi-
cient answer on the instant is not easy; but after a little reflec-
tion there is no difficulty.

  Yes, perhaps.

  Suppose then that we invite him to accompany us in the
argument, and then we may hope to show him that there is
nothing peculiar in the constitution of women which would
affect them in the administration of the State.

  By all means.

  Let us say to him: Come now, and we will ask you a ques-
tion: When you spoke of a nature gifted or not gifted in any
respect, did you mean to say that one man will acquire a thing
easily, another with difficulty; a little learning will lead the one
to discover a great deal, whereas the other, after much study
and application, no sooner learns than he forgets; or again,
did you mean, that the one has a body which is a good servant
to his mind, while the body of the other is a hinderance to him?
--would not these be the sort of differences which distinguish
the man gifted by nature from the one who is ungifted?

  No one will deny that.

  And can you mention any pursuit of mankind in which the
male sex has not all these gifts and qualities in a higher degree
than the female? Need I waste time in speaking of the art
of weaving, and the management of pancakes and preserves,
in which womankind does really appear to be great, and in
which for her to be beaten by a man is of all things the most
absurd?

  You are quite right, he replied, in maintaining the general
inferiority of the female sex: although many women are in
many things superior to many men, yet on the whole what you
say is true.

  And if so, my friend, I said, there is no special faculty of
administration in a State which a woman has because she is a
woman, or which a man has by virtue of his sex, but the gifts
of nature are alike diffused in both; all the pursuits of men are
the pursuits of women also, but in all of them a woman is in-
ferior to a man.

  Very true.

  Then are we to impose all our enactments on men and none
of them on women?

  That will never do.

  One woman has a gift of healing, another not; one is a
musician, and another has no music in her nature?

  Very true.

  And one woman has a turn for gymnastic and military exer-
cises, and another is unwarlike and hates gymnastics?

  Certainly.

  And one woman is a philosopher, and another is an enemy
of philosophy; one has spirit, and another is without spirit?

  That is also true.

  Then one woman will have the temper of a guardian, and
another not. Was not the selection of the male guardians de-
termined by differences of this sort?

  Yes.

  Men and women alike possess the qualities which make a
guardian; they differ only in their comparative strength or
weakness.

  Obviously.

  And those women who have such qualities are to be selected
as the companions and colleagues of men who have similar
qualities and whom they resemble in capacity and in character?

  Very true.

  And ought not the same natures to have the same pursuits?

  They ought.

  Then, as we were saying before, there is nothing unnatural
in assigning music and gymnastics to the wives of the guar-
dians--to that point we come round again.

  Certainly not.

  The law which we then enacted was agreeable to nature,
and therefore not an impossibility or mere aspiration; and the
contrary practice, which prevails at present, is in reality a viola-
tion of nature.

  That appears to be true.

  We had to consider, first, whether our proposals were possi-
ble, and secondly whether they were the most beneficial?

  Yes.

  And the possibility has been acknowledged?

  Yes.

  The very great benefit has next to be established?

  Quite so.

  You will admit that the same education which makes a man
a good guardian will make a woman a good guardian; for their
original nature is the same?

  Yes.

  I should like to ask you a question.

  What is it?

  Would you say that all men are equal in excellence, or is one
man better than another?

  The latter.

  And in the commonwealth which we were founding do you
conceive the guardians who have been brought up on our
model system to be more perfect men, or the cobblers whose
education has been cobbling?

  What a ridiculous question!

  You have answered me, I replied: Well, and may we not
further say that our guardians are the best of our citizens?

  By far the best.

  And will not their wives be the best women?

  Yes, by far the best.

  And can there be anything better for the interests of the
State than that the men and women of a State should be as
good as possible?

  There can be nothing better.

  And this is what the arts of music and gymnastics, when
present in such a manner as we have described, will accom-
plish?

  Certainly.

  Then we have made an enactment not only possible but in
the highest degree beneficial to the State?

  True.

  Then let the wives of our guardians strip, for their virtue
will be their robe, and let them share in the toils of war and
the defence of their country; only in the distribution of labors
the lighter are to be assigned to the women, who are the weaker
natures, but in other respects their duties are to be the same.
And as for the man who laughs at naked women exercising
their bodies from the best of motives, in his laughter he is
plucking

  "A fruit of unripe wisdom,"

and he himself is ignorant of what he is laughing at, or what
he is about; for that is, and ever will be, the best of sayings,
"that the useful is the noble, and the hurtful is the base."

  Very true.

  Here, then, is one difficulty in our law about women, which
we may say that we have now escaped; the wave has not swal-
lowed us up alive for enacting that the guardians of either sex
should have all their pursuits in common; to the utility and
also to the possibility of this arrangement the consistency of the
argument with itself bears witness.

  Yes, that was a mighty wave which you have escaped.

  Yes, I said, but a greater is coming; you will not think much
of this when you see the next.

  Go on; let me see.

  The law, I said, which is the sequel of this and of all that
has preceded, is to the following effect, "that the wives of our
guardians are to be common, and their children are to be com-
mon, and no parent is to know his own child, nor any child his
parent."

  Yes, he said, that is a much greater wave than the other;
and the possibility as well as the utility of such a law are far
more questionable.

  I do not think, I said, that there can be any dispute about
the very great utility of having wives and children in common;
the possibility is quite another matter, and will be very much
disputed.

  I think that a good many doubts may be raised about both.

  You imply that the two questions must be combined, I re-
plied. Now I meant that you should admit the utility; and
in this way, as I thought, I should escape from one of them,
and then there would remain only the possibility.

  But that little attempt is detected, and therefore you will
please to give a defence of both.

  Well, I said, I submit to my fate. Yet grant me a little
favor: let me feast my mind with the dream as day-dreamers
are in the habit of feasting themselves when they are walking
alone; for before they have discovered any means of effecting
their wishes--that is a matter which never troubles them--they
would rather not tire themselves by thinking about possibilities;
but assuming that what they desire is already granted to them,
they proceed with their plan, and delight in detailing what they
mean to do when their wish has come true--that is a way which
they have of not doing much good to a capacity which was
never good for much. Now I myself am beginning to lose
heart, and I should like, with your permission, to pass over the
question of possibility at present. Assuming therefore the pos-
sibility of the proposal, I shall now proceed to inquire how the
rulers will carry out these arrangements, and I shall demon-
strate that our plan, if executed, will be of the greatest benefit
to the State and to the guardians. First of all, then, if you
have no objection, I will endeavor with your help to consider
the advantages of the measure; and hereafter the question of
possibility.

  I have no objection; proceed.

  First, I think that if our rulers and their auxiliaries are to
be worthy of the name which they bear, there must be willing-
ness to obey in the one and the power of command in the other;
the guardians themselves must obey the laws, and they must
also imitate the spirit of them in any details which are intrusted
to their care.

  That is right, he said.

  You, I said, who are their legislator, having selected the men,
will now select the women and give them to them; they must
be as far as possible of like natures with them; and they must
live in common houses and meet at common meals. None of
them will have anything specially his or her own; they will be
together, and will be brought up together, and will associate
at gymnastic exercises. And so they will be drawn by a neces-
sity of their natures to have intercourse with each other--ne-
cessity is not too strong a word, I think?

  Yes, he said; necessity, not geometrical, but another sort of
necessity which lovers know, and which is far more convincing
and constraining to the mass of mankind.

  True, I said; and this, Glaucon, like all the rest, must proceed
after an orderly fashion; in a city of the blessed, licentiousness
is an unholy thing which the rulers will forbid.

  Yes, he said, and it ought not to be permitted.

  Then clearly the next thing will be to make matrimony sacred
in the highest degree, and what is most beneficial will be deemed
sacred?

  Exactly.

  And how can marriages be made most beneficial? that is a
question which I put to you, because I see in your house dogs
for hunting, and of the nobler sort of birds not a few. Now,
I beseech you, do tell me, have you ever attended to their pair-
ing and breeding?

  In what particulars?

  Why, in the first place, although they are all of a good sort,
are not some better than others?

  True.

  And do you breed from them all indifferently, or do you take
care to breed from the best only?

  From the best.

  And do you take the oldest or the youngest, or only those
of ripe age?

  I choose only those of ripe age.

  And if care was not taken in the breeding, your dogs and
birds would greatly deteriorate?

  Certainly.

  And the same of horses and of animals in general?

  Undoubtedly.

  Good heavens! my dear friend, I said, what consummate skill
will our rulers need if the same principle holds of the human
species!

  Certainly, the same principle holds; but why does this in-
volve any particular skill?

  Because, I said, our rulers will often have to practise upon
the body corporate with medicines. Now you know that when
patients do not require medicines, but have only to be put under
a regimen, the inferior sort of practitioner is deemed to be good
enough; but when medicine has to be given, then the doctor
should be more of a man.

  That is quite true, he said; but to what are you alluding?

  I mean, I replied, that our rulers will find a considerable dose
of falsehood and deceit necessary for the good of their subjects:
we were saying that the use of all these things regarded as med-
icines might be of advantage.

  And we were very right.

  And this lawful use of them seems likely to be often needed
in the regulations of marriages and births.

  How so?

  Why, I said, the principle has been already laid down that
the best of either sex should be united with the best as often,
and the inferior with the inferior as seldom, as possible; and
that they should rear the offspring of the one sort of union,
but not of the other, if the flock is to be maintained in first-rate
condition. Now these goings on must be a secret which the
rulers only know, or there will be a further danger of our herd,
as the guardians may be termed, breaking out into rebellion.

  Very true.

  Had we better not appoint certain festivals at which we will
bring together the brides and bridegrooms, and sacrifices will
be offered and suitable hymeneal songs composed by our poets:
the number of weddings is a matter which must be left to the
discretion of the rulers, whose aim will be to preserve the aver-
age of population? There are many other things which they
will have to consider, such as the effects of wars and diseases
and any similar agencies, in order as far as this is possible to
prevent the State from becoming either too large or too small.

  Certainly, he replied.

  We shall have to invent some ingenious kind of lots which
the less worthy may draw on each occasion of our bringing
them together, and then they will accuse their own ill-luck and
not the rulers.

  To be sure, he said.

  And I think that our braver and better youth, besides their
other honors and rewards, might have greater facilities of in-
tercourse with women given them; their bravery will be a rea-
son, and such fathers ought to have as many sons as possible.

  True.

  And the proper officers, whether male or female or both,
for offices are to be held by women as well as by men--
Yes--

  The proper officers will take the offspring of the good parents
to the pen or fold, and there they will deposit them with certain
nurses who dwell in a separate quarter; but the offspring of the
inferior, or of the better when they chance to be deformed, will
be put away in some mysterious, unknown place, as they should
be.

  Yes, he said, that must be done if the breed of the guardians
is to be kept pure.

  They will provide for their nurture, and will bring the
mothers to the fold when they are full of milk, taking the great-
est possible care that no mother recognizes her own child; and
other wet-nurses may be engaged if more are required. Care
will also be taken that the process of suckling shall not be pro-
tracted too long; and the mothers will have no getting up at
night or other trouble, but will hand over all this sort of thing
to the nurses and attendants.

  You suppose the wives of our guardians to have a fine easy
time of it when they are having children.

  Why, said I, and so they ought. Let us, however, proceed
with our scheme. We were saying that the parents should be
in the prime of life?

  Very true.

  And what is the prime of life? May it not be defined as a
period of about twenty years in a woman's life, and thirty
years in a man's?

  Which years do you mean to include?

  A woman, I said, at twenty years of age may begin to bear
children to the State, and continue to bear them until forty;
a man may begin at five-and-twenty, when he has passed the
point at which the pulse of life beats quickest, and continue to
beget children until he be fifty-five.

  Certainly, he said, both in men and women those years are
the prime of physical as well as of intellectual vigor.
Anyone above or below the prescribed ages who takes part
in the public hymeneals shall be said to have done an unholy
and unrighteous thing; the child of which he is the father, if
it steals into life, will have been conceived under auspices very
unlike the sacrifices and prayers, which at each hymeneal priest-
esses and priests and the whole city will offer, that the new
generation may be better and more useful than their good and
useful parents, whereas his child will be the offspring of dark-
ness and strange lust.

  Very true, he replied.

  And the same law will apply to any one of those within the
prescribed age who forms a connection with any woman in the
prime of life without the sanction of the rulers; for we shall
say that he is raising up a bastard to the State, uncertified and
unconsecrated.

  Very true, he replied.

  This applies, however, only to those who are within the spec-
ified age: after that we will allow them to range at will, except
that a man may not marry his daughter or his daughter's
daughter, or his mother or his mother's mother; and women,
on the other hand, are prohibited from marrying their sons or
fathers, or son's son or father's father, and so on in either di-
rection. And we grant all this, accompanying the permission
with strict orders to prevent any embryo which may come into
being from seeing the light; and if any force a way to the birth,
the parents must understand that the offspring of such a union
cannot be maintained, and arrange accordingly.

  That also, he said, is a reasonable proposition. But how
will they know who are fathers and daughters, and so on?

  They will never know. The way will be this: dating from
the day of the hymeneal, the bridegroom who was then married
will call all the male children who are born in the seventh and
the tenth month afterward his sons, and the female children his
daughters, and they will call him father, and he will call their
children his grandchildren, and they will call the elder genera-
tion grandfathers and grandmothers. All who were begotten
at the time when their fathers and mothers came together will
be called their brothers and sisters, and these, as I was saying,
will be forbidden to intermarry. This, however, is not to be
understood as an absolute prohibition of the marriage of
brothers and sisters; if the lot favors them, and they receive the
sanction of the Pythian oracle, the law will allow them.

  Quite right, he replied.

  Such is the scheme, Glaucon, according to which the guar-
dians of our State are to have their wives and families in com-
mon. And now you would have the argument show that this
community is consistent with the rest of our polity, and also
that nothing can be better--would you not?

  Yes, certainly.

  Shall we try to find a common basis by asking of ourselves
what ought to be the chief aim of the legislator in making laws
and in the organization of a State--what is the greatest good,
and what is the greatest evil, and then consider whether our
previous description has the stamp of the good or of the evil?

  By all means.

  Can there be any greater evil than discord and distraction
and plurality where unity ought to reign? or any greater good
than the bond of unity?

  There cannot.

  And there is unity where there is community of pleasures
and pains--where all the citizens are glad or grieved on the
same occasions of joy and sorrow?

  No doubt.

  Yes; and where there is no common but only private feeling
a State is disorganized--when you have one-half of the world
triumphing and the other plunged in grief at the same events
happening to the city or the citizens?

  Certainly.

  Such differences commonly originate in a disagreement about
the use of the terms "mine" and "not mine," "his" and "not
his."

  Exactly so.

  And is not that the best-ordered State in which the greatest
number of persons apply the terms "mine" and "not mine" in
the same way to the same thing?

  Quite true.

  Or that again which most nearly approaches to the condition
of the individual--as in the body, when but a finger of one of
us is hurt, the whole frame, drawn toward the soul as a centre
and forming one kingdom under the ruling power therein, feels
the hurt and sympathizes all together with the part affected,
and we say that the man has a pain in his finger; and the
same expression is used about any other part of the body, which
has a sensation of pain at suffering or of pleasure at the alle-
viation of suffering.

  Very true, he replied; and I agree with you that in the best-
ordered State there is the nearest approach to this common feel-
ing which you describe.

  Then when any one of the citizens experiences any good or
evil, the whole State will make his case their own, and will
either rejoice or sorrow with him?

  Yes, he said, that is what will happen in a well-ordered State.

  It will now be time, I said, for us to return to our State and
see whether this or some other form is most in accordance with
these fundamental principles.

  Very good.

  Our State, like every other, has rulers and subjects?

  True.

  All of whom will call one another citizens?

  Of course.

  But is there not another name which people give to their
rulers in other States?

  Generally they call them masters, but in democratic States
they simply call them rulers.

  And in our State what other name besides that of citizens
do the people give the rulers?

  They are called saviours and helpers, he replied.

  And what do the rulers call the people?

  Their maintainers and foster-fathers.

  And what do they call them in other States?

  Slaves.

  And what do the rulers call one another in other States?

  Fellow-rulers.

  And what in ours?

  Fellow-guardians.

  Did you ever know an example in any other State of a ruler
who would speak of one of his colleagues as his friend and of
another as not being his friend?

  Yes, very often.

  And the friend he regards and describes as one in whom
he has an interest, and the other as a stranger in whom he has
no interest?

  Exactly.

  But would any of your guardians think or speak of any
other guardian as a stranger?

  Certainly he would not; for everyone whom they meet will
be regarded by them either as a brother or sister, or father
or mother, or son or daughter, or as the child or parent of
those who are thus connected with him.

  Capital, I said; but let me ask you once more: Shall they
be a family in name only; or shall they in all their actions be
true to the name? For example, in the use of the word
"father," would the care of a father be implied and the filial
reverence and duty and obedience to him which the law com-
mands; and is the violator of these duties to be regarded as an
impious and unrighteous person who is not likely to receive
much good either at the hands of God or of man? Are these
to be or not to be the strains which the children will hear re-
peated in their ears by all the citizens about those who are inti-
mated to them to be their parents and the rest of their kinsfolk?

  These, he said, and none other; for what can be more ridicu-
lous than for them to utter the names of family ties with the
lips only and not to act in the spirit of them?

  Then in our city the language of harmony and concord will
be more often heard than in any other. As I was describing
before, when anyone is well or ill, the universal word will be
"with me it is well" or "it is ill."

  Most true.

  And agreeably to this mode of thinking and speaking, were
we not saying that they will have their pleasures and pains in
common?

  Yes, and so they will.

  And they will have a common interest in the same thing
which they will alike call "my own," and having this common
interest they will have a common feeling of pleasure and pain?

  Yes, far more so than in other States.

  And the reason of this, over and above the general constitu-
tion of the State, will be that the guardians will have a com-
munity of women and children?

  That will be the chief reason.

  And this unity of feeling we admitted to be the greatest good,
as was implied in our comparison of a well-ordered State to the
relation of the body and the members, when affected by pleas-
ure or pain?

  That we acknowledged, and very rightly.

  Then the community of wives and children among our citi-
zens is clearly the source of the greatest good to the State?

  Certainly.

  And this agrees with the other principle which we were
affirming--that the guardians were not to have houses or lands
or any other property; their pay was to be their food, which
they were to receive from the other citizens, and they were to
have no private expenses; for we intended them to preserve
their true character of guardians.

  Right, he replied.

  Both the community of property and the community of fami-
lies, as I am saying, tend to make them more truly guardians;
they will not tear the city in pieces by differing about "mine"
and "not mine;" each man dragging any acquisition which he
has made into a separate house of his own, where he has a sep-
arate wife and children and private pleasures and pains; but
all will be affected as far as may be by the same pleasures and
pains because they are all of one opinion about what is near and
dear to them, and therefore they all tend toward a common end.

  Certainly, he replied.

  And as they have nothing but their persons which they can
call their own, suits and complaints will have no existence
among them; they will be delivered from all those quarrels of
which money or children or relations are the occasion.

  Of course they will.

  Neither will trials for assault or insult ever be likely to occur
among them. For that equals should defend themselves against
equals we shall maintain to be honorable and right; we shall
make the protection of the person a matter of necessity.

  That is good, he said.

  Yes; and there is a further good in the law; viz., that if
a man has a quarrel with another he will satisfy his resentment
then and there, and not proceed to more dangerous lengths.

  Certainly.

  To the elder shall be assigned the duty of ruling and chastis-
ing the younger.

  Clearly.

  Nor can there be a doubt that the younger will not strike or
do any other violence to an elder, unless the magistrates com-
mand him; nor will he slight him in any way. For there are
two guardians, shame and fear, mighty to prevent him: shame,
which makes men refrain from laying hands on those who are
to them in the relation of parents; fear, that the injured one
will be succored by the others who are his brothers, sons,
fathers.

  That is true, he replied.

  Then in every way the laws will help the citizens to keep the
peace with one another?

  Yes, there will be no want of peace.

  And as the guardians will never quarrel among themselves
there will be no danger of the rest of the city being divided
either against them or against one another.

  None whatever.

  I hardly like even to mention the little meannesses of which
they will be rid, for they are beneath notice: such, for example,
as the flattery of the rich by the poor, and all the pains and
pangs which men experience in bringing up a family, and in
finding money to buy necessaries for their household, borrow-
ing and then repudiating, getting how they can, and giving
the money into the hands of women and slaves to keep--
the many evils of so many kinds which people suffer in this
way are mean enough and obvious enough, and not worth
speaking of.

  Yes, he said, a man has no need of eyes in order to perceive
that.

  And from all these evils they will be delivered, and their life
will be blessed as the life of Olympic victors and yet more
blessed.

  How so?

  The Olympic victor, I said, is deemed happy in receiving a
part only of the blessedness which is secured to our citizens,
who have won a more glorious victory and have a more com-
plete maintenance at the public cost. For the victory which
they have won is the salvation of the whole State; and the
crown with which they and their children are crowned is the
fulness of all that life needs; they receive rewards from the
hands of their country while living, and after death have an
honorable burial.

  Do you remember, I said, how in the course of the previous
discussion someone who shall be nameless accused us of mak-
ing our guardians unhappy--they had nothing and might have
possessed all things--to whom we replied that, if an occasion
offered, we might perhaps hereafter consider this question,
but that, as at present divided, we would make our guardians
truly guardians, and that we were fashioning the State with a
view to the greatest happiness, not of any particular class, but
of the whole?

  Yes, I remember.

  And what do you say, now that the life of our protectors is
made out to be far better and nobler than that of Olympic vic-
tors--is the life of shoemakers, or any other artisans, or of
husbandmen, to be compared with it?

  Certainly not.

  At the same time I ought here to repeat what I have said
elsewhere, that if any of our guardians shall try to be happy
in such a manner that he will cease to be a guardian, and is not
content with this safe and harmonious life, which, in our judg-
ment, is of all lives the best, but, infatuated by some youthful
conceit of happiness which gets up into his head shall seek to
appropriate the whole State to himself, then he will have to
learn how wisely Hesiod spoke, when he said, "half is more
than the whole."

  If he were to consult me, I should say to him: Stay where
you are, when you have the offer of such a life.

  You agree then, I said, that men and women are to have a
common way of life such as we have described--common edu-
cation, common children; and they are to watch over the citi-
zens in common whether abiding in the city or going out to
war; they are to keep watch together, and to hunt together
like dogs; and always and in all things, as far as they are able,
women are to share with the men? And in so doing they will
do what is best, and will not violate, but preserve, the natural
relation of the sexes.

  I agree with you, he replied.

  The inquiry, I said, has yet to be made, whether such a com-
munity will be found possible--as among other animals, so also
among men--and if possible, in what way possible?

  You have anticipated the question which I was about to
suggest.

  There is no difficulty, I said, in seeing how war will be car-
ried on by them.

  How?

  Why, of course they will go on expeditions together; and
will take with them any of their children who are strong
enough, that, after the manner of the artisan's child, they may
look on at the work which they will have to do when they are
grown up; and besides looking on they will have to help and
be of use in war, and to wait upon their fathers and mothers.
Did you never observe in the arts how the potters' boys look on
and help, long before they touch the wheel?

  Yes, I have.

  And shall potters be more careful in educating their children
and in giving them the opportunity of seeing and practising
their duties than our guardians will be?

  The idea is ridiculous, he said.

  There is also the effect on the parents, with whom, as with
other animals, the presence of their young ones will be the
greatest incentive to valor.

  That is quite true, Socrates; and yet if they are defeated,
which may often happen in war, how great the danger is! the
children will be lost as well as their parents, and the State will
never recover.

  True, I said; but would you never allow them to run any
risk?

  I am far from saying that.

  Well, but if they are ever to run a risk should they not do
so on some occasion when, if they escape disaster, they will be
the better for it?

  Clearly.

  Whether the future soldiers do or do not see war in the days
of their youth is a very important matter, for the sake of which
some risk may fairly be incurred.

  Yes, very important.

  This then must be our first step--to make our children spec-
tators of war; but we must also contrive that they shall be se-
cured against danger; then all will be well.

  True.

  Their parents may be supposed not to be blind to the risks
of war, but to know, as far as human foresight can, what ex-
peditions are safe and what dangerous?

  That may be assumed.

  And they will take them on the safe expeditions and be cau-
tious about the dangerous ones?

  True.

  And they will place them under the command of experienced
veterans who will be their leaders and teachers?

  Very properly.

  Still, the dangers of war cannot be always foreseen; there
is a good deal of chance about them?

  True.

  Then against such chances the children must be at once fur-
nished with wings, in order that in the hour of need they may
fly away and escape.

  What do you mean? he said.

  I mean that we must mount them on horses in their earliest
youth, and when they have learnt to ride, take them on horse-
back to see war: the horses must not be spirited and warlike,
but the most tractable and yet the swiftest that can be had. In
this way they will get an excellent view of what is hereafter
to be their own business; and if there is danger they have only
to follow their elder leaders and escape.

  I believe that you are right, he said.

  Next, as to war; what are to be the relations of your soldiers
to one another and to their enemies? I should be inclined to
propose that the soldier who leaves his rank or throws away
his arms, or is guilty of any other act of cowardice, should be
degraded into the rank of a husbandman or artisan. What
do you think?

  By all means, I should say.

  And he who allows himself to be taken prisoner may as well
be made a present of to his enemies; he is their lawful prey,
and let them do what they like with him.

  Certainly.

  But the hero who has distinguished himself, what shall be
done to him? In the first place, he shall receive honor in the
army from his youthful comrades; every one of them in succes-
sion shall crown him. What do you say?

  I approve.

  And what do you say to his receiving the right hand of fel-
lowship?

  To that too, I agree.

  But you will hardly agree to my next proposal.

  What is your proposal?

  That he should kiss and be kissed by them.

  Most certainly, and I should be disposed to go further, and
say: Let no one whom he has a mind to kiss refuse to be kissed
by him while the expedition lasts. So that if there be a lover
in the army, whether his love be youth or maiden, he may be
more eager to win the prize of valor.

  Capital, I said. That the brave man is to have more wives
than others has been already determined: and he is to have first
choices in such matters more than others, in order that he may
have as many children as possible?

  Agreed.

  Again, there is another manner in which, according to
Homer, brave youths should be honored; for he tells how
Ajax, after he had distinguished himself in battle, was re-
warded with long chines, which seems to be a compliment ap-
propriate to a hero in the flower of his age, being not only a
tribute of honor but also a very strengthening thing.

  Most true, he said.

  Then in this, I said, Homer shall be our teacher; and we too,
at sacrifices and on the like occasions, will honor the brave ac-
cording to the measure of their valor, whether men or women,
with hymns and those other distinctions which we were men-
tioning; also with

  "seats of precedence, and meats and full cups;"

and in honoring them, we shall be at the same time training
them.

  That, he replied, is excellent.

  Yes, I said; and when a man dies gloriously in war shall
we not say, in the first place, that he is of the golden race?

  To be sure.

  Nay, have we not the authority of Hesiod for affirming that
when they are dead

  "They are holy angels upon the earth, authors of good, averters
   of evil, the guardians of speech-gifted men"?

  Yes; and we accept his authority.

  We must learn of the god how we are to order the sepulture
of divine and heroic personages, and what is to be their special
distinction; and we must do as he bids?

  By all means.

  And in ages to come we will reverence them and kneel before
their sepulchres as at the graves of heroes. And not only they
but any who are deemed pre-eminently good, whether they die
from age or in any other way, shall be admitted to the same
honors.

  That is very right, he said.

  Next, how shall our soldiers treat their enemies? What
about this?

  In what respect do you mean?

  First of all, in regard to slavery? Do you think it right that
Hellenes should enslave Hellenic States, or allow others to en-
slave them, if they can help? Should not their custom be to
spare them, considering the danger which there is that the
whole race may one day fall under the yoke of the barbarians?

  To spare them is infinitely better.

  Then no Hellene should be owned by them as a slave; that
is a rule which they will observe and advise the other Hellenes
to observe.

  Certainly, he said; they will in this way be united against
the barbarians and will keep their hands off one another.

  Next as to the slain; ought the conquerors, I said, to take
anything but their armor? Does not the practice of despoil-
ing an enemy afford an excuse for not facing the battle?
Cowards skulk about the dead, pretending that they are ful-
filling a duty, and many an army before now has been lost
from this love of plunder.

  Very true.

  And is there not illiberality and avarice in robbing a corpse,
and also a degree of meanness and womanishness in making an
enemy of the dead body when the real enemy has flown away
and left only his fighting gear behind him--is not this rather
like a dog who cannot get at his assailant, quarrelling with the
stones which strike him instead?

  Very like a dog, he said.

  Then we must abstain from spoiling the dead or hindering
their burial?

  Yes, he replied, we most certainly must.

  Neither shall we offer up arms at the temples of the gods,
least of all the arms of Hellenes, if we care to maintain good
feeling with other Hellenes; and, indeed, we have reason to
fear that the offering of spoils taken from kinsmen may be a
pollution unless commanded by the god himself?

  Very true.

  Again, as to the devastation of Hellenic territory or the burn-
ing of houses, what is to be the practice?

  May I have the pleasure, he said, of hearing your opinion?

  Both should be forbidden, in my judgment; I would take the
annual produce and no more. Shall I tell you why?

  Pray do.

  Why, you see, there is a difference in the names "discord"
and "war," and I imagine that there is also a difference in their
natures; the one is expressive of what is internal and domestic,
the other of what is external and foreign; and the first of the
two is termed discord, and only the second, war.

  That is a very proper distinction, he replied.

  And may I not observe with equal propriety that the Hellenic
race is all united together by ties of blood and friendship, and
alien and strange to the barbarians?

  Very good, he said.

  And therefore when Hellenes fight with barbarians, and bar-
barians with Hellenes, they will be described by us as being at
war when they fight, and by nature enemies, and this kind of
antagonism should be called war; but when Hellenes fight with
one another we shall say that Hellas is then in a state of dis-
order and discord, they being by nature friends; and such en-
mity is to be called discord.

  I agree.

  Consider then, I said, when that which we have acknowl-
edged to be discord occurs, and a city is divided, if both parties
destroy the lands and burn the houses of one another, how
wicked does the strife appear! No true lover of his country
would bring himself to tear in pieces his own nurse and mother:
There might be reason in the conqueror depriving the con-
quered of their harvest, but still they would have the idea of
peace in their hearts, and would not mean to go on fighting
forever.

  Yes, he said, that is a better temper than the other.

  And will not the city, which you are founding, be an Hellenic
city?

  It ought to be, he replied.

  Then will not the citizens be good and civilized?

  Yes, very civilized.

  And will they not be lovers of Hellas, and think of Hellas as
their own land, and share in the common temples?

  Most certainly.

  And any difference which arises among them will be re-
garded by them as discord only--a quarrel among friends,
which is not to be called a war?

  Certainly not.

  Then they will quarrel as those who intend some day to be
reconciled?
Certainly.

  They will use friendly correction, but will not enslave or de-
stroy their opponents; they will be correctors, not enemies?

  Just so.

  And as they are Hellenes themselves they will not devastate
Hellas, nor will they burn houses, nor ever suppose that the
whole population of a city--men, women, and children--are
equally their enemies, for they know that the guilt of war is
always confined to a few persons and that the many are their
friends. And for all these reasons they will be unwilling to
waste their lands and raze their houses; their enmity to them
will only last until the many innocent sufferers have compelled
the guilty few to give satisfaction?

  I agree, he said, that our citizens should thus deal with their
Hellenic enemies; and with barbarians as the Hellenes now
deal with one another.

  Then let us enact this law also for our guardians: that they
are neither to devastate the lands of Hellenes nor to burn their
houses.

  Agreed; and we may agree also in thinking that these, like
all our previous enactments, are very good.

  But still I must say, Socrates, that if you are allowed to go on
in this way you will entirely forget the other question which at
the commencement of this discussion you thrust aside: Is such
an order of things possible, and how, if at all? For I am quite
ready to acknowledge that the plan which you propose, if only
feasible, would do all sorts of good to the State. I will add,
what you have omitted, that your citizens will be the bravest
of warriors, and will never leave their ranks, for they will all
know one another, and each will call the other father, brother,
son; and if you suppose the women to join their armies, whether
in the same rank or in the rear, either as a terror to the enemy,
or as auxiliaries in case of need, I know that they will then be
absolutely invincible; and there are many domestic advantages
which might also be mentioned and which I also fully acknowl-
edge: but, as I admit all these advantages and as many more
as you please, if only this State of yours were to come into
existence, we need say no more about them; assuming then the
existence of the State, let us now turn to the question of possi-
bility and ways and means--the rest may be left.

  If I loiter for a moment, you instantly make a raid upon
me, I said, and have no mercy; I have hardly escaped the first
and second waves, and you seem not to be aware that you are
now bringing upon me the third, which is the greatest and
heaviest. When you have seen and heard the third wave, I
think you will be more considerate and will acknowledge that
some fear and hesitation were natural respecting a proposal
so extraordinary as that which I have now to state and in-
vestigate.

  The more appeals of this sort which you make, he said, the
more determined are we that you shall tell us how such a State
is possible: speak out and at once.

  Let me begin by reminding you that we found our way
hither in the search after justice and injustice.

  True, he replied; but what of that?

  I was only going to ask whether, if we have discovered them,
we are to require that the just man should in nothing fail of
absolute justice; or may we be satisfied with an approxima-
tion, and the attainment in him of a higher degree of justice
than is to be found in other men?

  The approximation will be enough.

  We were inquiring into the nature of absolute justice and
into the character of the perfectly just, and into injustice and
the perfectly unjust, that we might have an ideal. We were to
look at these in order that we might judge of our own happi-
ness and unhappiness according to the standard which they
exhibited and the degree in which we resembled them, but not
with any view of showing that they could exist in fact.

  True, he said.

  Would a painter be any the worse because, after having de-
lineated with consummate art an ideal of a perfectly beautiful
man, he was unable to show that any such man could ever have
existed?

  He would be none the worse.

  Well, and were we not creating an ideal of a perfect State?

  To be sure.

  And is our theory a worse theory because we are unable to
prove the possibility of a city being ordered in the manner de-
scribed?

  Surely not, he replied.

  That is the truth, I said. But if, at your request, I am to try
and show how and under what conditions the possibility is
highest, I must ask you, having this in view, to repeat your
former admissions.

  What admissions?

  I want to know whether ideals are ever fully realized in lan-
guage? Does not the word express more than the fact, and
must not the actual, whatever a man may think, always, in the
nature of things, fall short of the truth? What do you say?

  I agree.

  Then you must not insist on my proving that the actual State
will in every respect coincide with the ideal: if we are only
able to discover how a city may be governed nearly as we pro-
posed, you will admit that we have discovered the possibility
which you demand; and will be contented. I am sure that I
should be contented--will not you?

  Yes, I will.

  Let me next endeavor to show what is that fault in States
which is the cause of their present maladministration, and what
is the least change which will enable a State to pass into the
truer form; and let the change, if possible, be of one thing only,
or, if not, of two; at any rate, let the changes be as few and
slight as possible.

  Certainly, he replied.

  I think, I said, that there might be a reform of the State if
only one change were made, which is not a slight or easy though
still a possible one.

  What is it? he said.

  Now then, I said, I go to meet that which I liken to the great-
est of the waves; yet shall the word be spoken, even though the
wave break and drown me in laughter and dishonor; and do
you mark my words.

  Proceed.

  I said: "Until philosophers are kings, or the kings and
princes of this world have the spirit and power of philosophy,
and political greatness and wisdom meet in one, and those com-
moner natures who pursue either to the exclusion of the other
are compelled to stand aside, cities will never have rest from
their evils--no, nor the human race, as I believe--and then
only will this our State have a possibility of life and behold
the light of day." Such was the thought, my dear Glaucon,
which I would fain have uttered if it had not seemed too ex-
travagant; for to be convinced that in no other State can there
be happiness private or public is indeed a hard thing.

  Socrates, what do you mean? I would have you consider
that the word which you have uttered is one at which numerous
persons, and very respectable persons too, in a figure pulling
off their coats all in a moment, and seizing any weapon that
comes to hand, will run at you might and main, before you
know where you are, intending to do heaven knows what; and
if you don't prepare an answer, and put yourself in motion, you
will be "pared by their fine wits," and no mistake.

  You got me into the scrape, I said.

  And I was quite right; however, I will do all I can to get
you out of it; but I can only give you good-will and good ad-
vice, and, perhaps, I may be able to fit answers to your ques-
tions better than another--that is all. And now, having such
an auxiliary, you must do your best to show the unbelievers
that you are right.

  I ought to try, I said, since you offer me such invaluable as-
sistance. And I think that, if there is to be a chance of our
escaping, we must explain to them whom we mean when we
say that philosophers are to rule in the State; then we shall be
able to defend ourselves: There will be discovered to be some
natures who ought to study philosophy and to be leaders in the
State; and others who are not born to be philosophers, and are
meant to be followers rather than leaders.

  Then now for a definition, he said.

  Follow me, I said, and I hope that I may in some way or
other be able to give you a satisfactory explanation.

  Proceed.

  I dare say that you remember, and therefore I need not re-
mind you, that a lover, if he is worthy of the name, ought to
show his love, not to some one part of that which he loves, but
to the whole.

  I really do not understand, and therefore beg of you to assist
my memory.

  Another person, I said, might fairly reply as you do; but a
man of pleasure like yourself ought to know that all who are
in the flower of youth do somehow or other raise a pang or
emotion in a lover's breast, and are thought by him to be
worthy of his affectionate regards. Is not this a way which
you have with the fair: one has a snub nose, and you praise his
charming face; the hook-nose of another has, you say, a royal
look; while he who is neither snub nor hooked has the grace of
regularity: the dark visage is manly, the fair are children of
the gods; and as to the sweet "honey-pale," as they are called,
what is the very name but the invention of a lover who talks
in diminutives, and is not averse to paleness if appearing on the
cheek of youth? In a word, there is no excuse which you will
not make, and nothing which you will not say, in order not to
lose a single flower that blooms in the spring-time of youth.

  If you make me an authority in matters of love, for the sake
of the argument, I assent.

  And what do you say of lovers of wine? Do you not see
them doing the same? They are glad of any pretext of drink-
ing any wine.

  Very good.

  And the same is true of ambitious men; if they cannot com-
mand an army, they are willing to command a file; and if they
cannot be honored by really great and important persons, they
are glad to be honored by lesser and meaner people--but honor
of some kind they must have.

  Exactly.

  Once more let me ask: Does he who desires any class of
goods, desire the whole class or a part only?

  The whole.

  And may we not say of the philosopher that he is a lover,
not of a part of wisdom only, but of the whole?

  Yes, of the whole.

  And he who dislikes learning, especially in youth, when he
has no power of judging what is good and what is not, such
a one we maintain not to be a philosopher or a lover of knowl-
edge, just as he who refuses his food is not hungry, and may
be said to have a bad appetite and not a good one?

  Very true, he said.

  Whereas he who has a taste for every sort of knowledge and
who is curious to learn and is never satisfied, may be justly
termed a philosopher? Am I not right?

  Glaucon said: If curiosity makes a philosopher, you will
find many a strange being will have a title to the name. All
the lovers of sights have a delight in learning, and must there-
fore be included. Musical amateurs, too, are a folk strangely
out of place among philosophers, for they are the last persons
in the world who would come to anything like a philosophical
discussion, if they could help, while they run about at the Dio-
nysiac festivals as if they had let out their ears to hear every
chorus; whether the performance is in town or country--that
makes no difference--they are there. Now are we to maintain
that all these and any who have similar tastes, as well as the
professors of quite minor arts, are philosophers?

  Certainly not, I replied; they are only an imitation.

  He said: Who then are the true philosophers?

  Those, I said, who are lovers of the vision of truth.

  That is also good, he said; but I should like to know what
you mean?

  To another, I replied, I might have a difficulty in explaining;
but I am sure that you will admit a proposition which I am
about to make.

  What is the proposition?

  That since beauty is the opposite of ugliness, they are two?

  Certainly.

  And inasmuch as they are two, each of them is one?

  True again.

  And of just and unjust, good and evil, and of every other
class, the same remark holds: taken singly, each of them is
one; but from the various combinations of them with actions
and things and with one another, they are seen in all sorts of
lights and appear many?
Very true.

  And this is the distinction which I draw between the sight-
loving, art-loving, practical class and those of whom I am
speaking, and who are alone worthy of the name of philoso-
phers.

  How do you distinguish them? he said.

  The lovers of sounds and sights, I replied, are, as I conceive,
fond of fine tones and colors and forms and all the artificial
products that are made out of them, but their minds are in-
capable of seeing or loving absolute beauty.

  True, he replied.

  Few are they who are able to attain to the sight of this.

  Very true.

  And he who, having a sense of beautiful things has no sense
of absolute beauty, or who, if another lead him to a knowledge
of that beauty is unable to follow--of such a one I ask, Is he
awake or in a dream only? Reflect: is not the dreamer, sleep-
ing or waking, one who likens dissimilar things, who puts the
copy in the place of the real object?

  I should certainly say that such a one was dreaming.

  But take the case of the other, who recognizes the existence
of absolute beauty and is able to distinguish the idea from the
objects which participate in the idea, neither putting the objects
in the place of the idea nor the idea in the place of the objects--
is he a dreamer, or is he awake?

  He is wide awake.

  And may we not say that the mind of the one who knows
has knowledge, and that the mind of the other, who opines
only, has opinion?

  Certainly.

  But suppose that the latter should quarrel with us and dis-
pute our statement, can we administer any soothing cordial or
advice to him, without revealing to him that there is sad dis-
order in his wits?

  We must certainly offer him some good advice, he replied.

  Come, then, and let us think of something to say to him.
Shall we begin by assuring him that he is welcome to any
knowledge which he may have, and that we are rejoiced at his
having it? But we should like to ask him a question: Does
he who has knowledge know something or nothing? (You
must answer for him).

  I answer that he knows something.

  Something that is or is not?

  Something that is; for how can that which is not ever be
known?

  And are we assured, after looking at the matter from many
points of view, that absolute being is or may be absolutely
known, but that the utterly non-existent is utterly unknown?

  Nothing can be more certain.

  Good. But if there be anything which is of such a nature
as to be and not to be, that will have a place intermediate be-
tween pure being and the absolute negation of being?

  Yes, between them.

  And, as knowledge corresponded to being and ignorance of
necessity to not-being, for that intermediate between being and
not-being there has to be discovered a corresponding intermedi-
ate between ignorance and knowledge, if there be such?

  Certainly.

  Do we admit the existence of opinion?

  Undoubtedly.

  As being the same with knowledge, or another faculty?

  Another faculty.

  Then opinion and knowledge have to do with different kinds
of matter corresponding to this difference of faculties?

  Yes.

  And knowledge is relative to being and knows being. But
before I proceed further I will make a division.

  What division?

  I will begin by placing faculties in a class by themselves:
they are powers in us, and in all other things, by which we
do as we do. Sight and hearing, for example, I should call
faculties. Have I clearly explained the class which I mean?

  Yes, I quite understand.

  Then let me tell you my view about them. I do not see them,
and therefore the distinctions of figure, color, and the like,
which enable me to discern the differences of some things, do
not apply to them. In speaking of a faculty I think only of
its sphere and its result; and that which has the same sphere
and the same result I call the same faculty, but that which has
another sphere and another result I call different. Would that
be your way of speaking?

  Yes.

  And will you be so very good as to answer one more ques-
tion? Would you say that knowledge is a faculty, or in what
class would you place it?

  Certainly knowledge is a faculty, and the mightiest of all
faculties.

  And is opinion also a faculty?

  Certainly, he said; for opinion is that with which we are able
to form an opinion.

  And yet you were acknowledging a little while ago that
knowledge is not the same as opinion?

  Why, yes, he said: how can any reasonable being ever iden-
tify that which is infallible with that which errs?

  An excellent answer, proving, I said, that we are quite con-
scious of a distinction between them.

  Yes.

  Then knowledge and opinion having distinct powers have
also distinct spheres or subject-matters?

  That is certain.

  Being is the sphere or subject-matter of knowledge, and
knowledge is to know the nature of being?

  Yes.

  And opinion is to have an opinion?

  Yes.

  And do we know what we opine? or is the subject-matter
of opinion the same as the subject-matter of knowledge?

  Nay, he replied, that has been already disproven; if differ-
ence in faculty implies difference in the sphere or subject-mat-
ter, and if, as we were saying, opinion and knowledge are dis-
tinct faculties, then the sphere of knowledge and of opinion
cannot be the same.

  Then if being is the subject-matter of knowledge, something
else must be the subject-matter of opinion?

  Yes, something else.
Well, then, is not-being the subject-matter of opinion? or,
rather, how can there be an opinion at all about not-being?
Reflect: when a man has an opinion, has he not an opinion about
something? Can he have an opinion which is an opinion about
nothing?

  Impossible.

  He who has an opinion has an opinion about some one
thing?

  Yes.

  And not-being is not one thing, but, properly speaking, noth-
ing?

  True.

  Of not-being, ignorance was assumed to be the necessary
correlative; of being, knowledge?

  True, he said.

  Then opinion is not concerned either with being or with
not-being?

  Not with either.

  And can therefore neither be ignorance nor knowledge?

  That seems to be true.

  But is opinion to be sought without and beyond either of
them, in a greater clearness than knowledge, or in a greater
darkness than ignorance?

  In neither.

  Then I suppose that opinion appears to you to be darker than
knowledge, but lighter than ignorance?

  Both; and in no small degree.

  And also to be within and between them?

  Yes.

  Then you would infer that opinion is intermediate?

  No question.

  But were we not saying before, that if anything appeared
to be of a sort which is and is not at the same time, that sort
of thing would appear also to lie in the interval between pure
being and absolute not-being; and that the corresponding fac-
ulty is neither knowledge nor ignorance, but will be found in
the interval between them?

  True.

  And in that interval there has now been discovered some-
thing which we call opinion?

  There has.

  Then what remains to be discovered is the object which par-
takes equally of the nature of being and not-being, and cannot
rightly be termed either, pure and simple; this unknown term,
when discovered, we may truly call the subject of opinion,
and assign each to their proper faculty--the extremes to the
faculties of the extremes and the mean to the faculty of the
mean.

  True.

  This being premised, I would ask the gentleman who is of
opinion that there is no absolute or unchangeable idea of beauty
--in whose opinion the beautiful is the manifold--he, I say,
your lover of beautiful sights, who cannot bear to be told that
the beautiful is one, and the just is one, or that anything is
one--to him I would appeal, saying, Will you be so very kind,
sir, as to tell us whether, of all these beautiful things, there
is one which will not be found ugly; or of the just, which will
not be found unjust; or of the holy, which will not also be un-
holy?

  No, he replied; the beautiful will in some point of view be
found ugly; and the same is true of the rest.

  And may not the many which are doubles be also halves?--
doubles, that is, of one thing, and halves of another?

  Quite true.

  And things great and small, heavy and light, as they are
termed, will not be denoted by these any more than by the oppo-
site names?

  True; both these and the opposite names will always attach
to all of them.

  And can any one of those many things which are called by
particular names be said to be this rather than not to be this?

  He replied: They are like the punning riddles which are
asked at feasts or the children's puzzle about the eunuch aim-
ing at the bat, with what he hit him, as they say in the puzzle,
and upon what the bat was sitting. The individual objects
of which I am speaking are also a riddle, and have a double
sense: nor can you fix them in your mind, either as being or
not-being, or both, or neither.

  Then what will you do with them? I said. Can they have
a better place than between being and not-being? For they
are clearly not in greater darkness or negation than not-being,
or more full of light and existence than being.

  That is quite true, he said.

  Thus then we seem to have discovered that the many ideas
which the multitude entertain about the beautiful and about
all other things are tossing about in some region which is half-
way between pure being and pure not-being?

  We have.

  Yes; and we had before agreed that anything of this kind
which we might find was to be described as matter of opinion,
and not as matter of knowledge; being the intermediate flux
which is caught and detained by the intermediate faculty.

  Quite true.

  Then those who see the many beautiful, and who yet neither
see absolute beauty, nor can follow any guide who points the
way thither; who see the many just, and not absolute justice,
and the like--such persons may be said to have opinion but
not knowledge?

  That is certain.

  But those who see the absolute and eternal and immutable
may be said to know, and not to have opinion only?

  Neither can that be denied.

  The one love and embrace the subjects of knowledge, the
other those of opinion? The latter are the same, as I dare say
you will remember, who listened to sweet sounds and gazed
upon fair colors, but would not tolerate the existence of abso-
lute beauty.

  Yes, I remember.

  Shall we then be guilty of any impropriety in calling them
lovers of opinion rather than lovers of wisdom, and will they
be very angry with us for thus describing them?

  I shall tell them not to be angry; no man should be angry
at what is true.

  But those who love the truth in each thing are to be called
lovers of wisdom and not lovers of opinion.

  Assuredly.


                        BOOK VI
             THE PHILOSOPHY OF GOVERNMENT

(SOCRATES, GLAUCON.)

  AND thus, Glaucon, after the argument has gone a weary
way, the true and the false philosophers have at length
appeared in view.

  I do not think, he said, that the way could have been short-
ened.

  I suppose not, I said; and yet I believe that we might have
had a better view of both of them if the discussion could have
been confined to this one subject and if there were not many
other questions awaiting us, which he who desires to see in
what respect the life of the just differs from that of the unjust
must consider.

  And what is the next question? he asked.

  Surely, I said, the one which follows next in order. Inas-
much as philosophers only are able to grasp the eternal and un-
changeable, and those who wander in the region of the many
and variable are not philosophers, I must ask you which of the
two classes should be the rulers of our State?

  And how can we rightly answer that question?

  Whichever of the two are best able to guard the laws and
institutions of our State--let them be our guardians.

  Very good.

  Neither, I said, can there be any question that the guardian
who is to keep anything should have eyes rather than no eyes?

  There can be no question of that.

  And are not those who are verily and indeed wanting in the
knowledge of the true being of each thing, and who have in
their souls no clear pattern, and are unable as with a painter's
eye to look at the absolute truth and to that original to repair,
and having perfect vision of the other world to order the laws
about beauty, goodness, justice in this, if not already ordered,
and to guard and preserve the order of them--are not such
persons, I ask, simply blind?

  Truly, he replied, they are much in that condition.

  And shall they be our guardians when there are others who,
besides being their equals in experience and falling short of
them in no particular of virtue, also know the very truth of
each thing?

  There can be no reason, he said, for rejecting those who have
this greatest of all great qualities; they must always have the
first place unless they fail in some other respect.
Suppose, then, I said, that we determine how far they can
unite this and the other excellences.

  By all means.

  In the first place, as we began by observing, the nature of
the philosopher has to be ascertained. We must come to an
understanding about him, and, when we have done so, then,
if I am not mistaken, we shall also acknowledge that such a
union of qualities is possible, and that those in whom they are
united, and those only, should be rulers in the State.

  What do you mean?

  Let us suppose that philosophical minds always love knowl-
edge of a sort which shows them the eternal nature not varying
from generation and corruption.

  Agreed.

  And further, I said, let us agree that they are lovers of all
true being; there is no part whether greater or less, or more
or less honorable, which they are willing to renounce; as we
said before of the lover and the man of ambition.

  True.

  And if they are to be what we were describing, is there not
another quality which they should also possess?

  What quality?

  Truthfulness: they will never intentionally receive into their
minds falsehood, which is their detestation, and they will love
the truth.

  Yes, that may be safely affirmed of them.

  "May be." my friend, I replied, is not the word; say rather,
"must be affirmed:" for he whose nature is amorous of any-
thing cannot help loving all that belongs or is akin to the object
of his affections.

  Right, he said.

  And is there anything more akin to wisdom than truth?

  How can there be?

  Can the same nature be a lover of wisdom and a lover of
falsehood?

  Never.

  The true lover of learning then must from his earliest youth,
as far as in him lies, desire all truth?

  Assuredly.

  But then again, as we know by experience, he whose desires
are strong in one direction will have them weaker in others;
they will be like a stream which has been drawn off into an-
other channel.

  True.

  He whose desires are drawn toward knowledge in every form
will be absorbed in the pleasures of the soul, and will hardly
feel bodily pleasure--I mean, if he be a true philosopher and
not a sham one.

  That is most certain.

  Such a one is sure to be temperate and the reverse of covet-
ous; for the motives which make another man desirous of
having and spending, have no place in his character.

  Very true.

  Another criterion of the philosophical nature has also to be
considered.

  What is that?

  There should be no secret corner of illiberality; nothing can
be more antagonistic than meanness to a soul which is ever
longing after the whole of things both divine and human.

  Most true, he replied.

  Then how can he who has magnificence of mind and is the
spectator of all time and all existence, think much of human
life?

  He cannot.

  Or can such a one account death fearful?
No, indeed.

  Then the cowardly and mean nature has no part in true
philosophy?

  Certainly not.

  Or again: can he who is harmoniously constituted, who is
not covetous or mean, or a boaster, or a coward--can he, I say,
ever be unjust or hard in his dealings?

  Impossible.

  Then you will soon observe whether a man is just and gentle,
or rude and unsociable; these are the signs which distinguish
even in youth the philosophical nature from the unphilosophi-
cal.

  True.

  There is another point which should be remarked.

  What point?

  Whether he has or has not a pleasure in learning; for no one
will love that which gives him pain, and in which after much
toil he makes little progress.

  Certainly not.

  And again, if he is forgetful and retains nothing of what he
learns, will he not be an empty vessel?

  That is certain.
Laboring in vain, he must end in hating himself and his fruit-
less occupation?
Yes.

  Then a soul which forgets cannot be ranked among genuine
philosophic natures; we must insist that the philosopher should
have a good memory?

  Certainly.

  And once more, the inharmonious and unseemly nature can
only tend to disproportion?

  Undoubtedly.

  And do you consider truth to be akin to proportion or to
disproportion?

  To proportion.

  Then, besides other qualities, we must try to find a naturally
well-proportioned and gracious mind, which will move spon-
taneously toward the true being of everything.

  Certainly.

  Well, and do not all these qualities, which we have been
enumerating, go together, and are they not, in a manner, nec-
essary to a soul, which is to have a full and perfect participation
of being?

  They are absolutely necessary, he replied.

  And must not that be a blameless study which he only can
pursue who has the gift of a good memory, and is quick to
learn--noble, gracious, the friend of truth, justice, courage,
temperance, who are his kindred?

  The god of jealousy himself, he said, could find no fault
with such a study.

  And to men like him, I said, when perfected by years and
education, and to these only you will intrust the State.

  Here Adeimantus interposed and said: To these statements,
Socrates, no one can offer a reply; but when you talk in this
way, a strange feeling passes over the minds of your hearers:
They fancy that they are led astray a little at each step in the
argument, owing to their own want of skill in asking and an-
swering questions; these littles accumulate, and at the end of
the discussion they are found to have sustained a mighty over-
throw and all their former notions appear to be turned upside
down. And as unskilful players of draughts are at last shut
up by their more skilful adversaries and have no piece to move,
so they too find themselves shut up at last; for they have noth-
ing to say in this new game of which words are the counters;
and yet all the time they are in the right. The observation is
suggested to me by what is now occurring. For any one of
us might say, that although in words he is not able to meet you
at each step of the argument, he sees as a fact that the votaries
of philosophy, when they carry on the study, not only in youth
as a part of education, but as the pursuit of their maturer years,
most of them become strange monsters, not to say utter rogues,
and that those who may be considered the best of them are made
useless to the world by the very study which you extol.

  Well, and do you think that those who say so are wrong?

  I cannot tell, he replied; but I should like to know what is
your opinion.

  Hear my answer; I am of opinion that they are quite right.

  Then how can you be justified in saying that cities will not
cease from evil until philosophers rule in them, when philoso-
phers are acknowledged by us to be of no use to them?

  You ask a question, I said, to which a reply can only be given
in a parable.

  Yes, Socrates; and that is a way of speaking to which you
are not at all accustomed, I suppose.

  I perceive, I said, that you are vastly amused at having
plunged me into such a hopeless discussion; but now hear the
parable, and then you will be still more amused at the meagre-
ness of my imagination: for the manner in which the best men
are treated in their own States is so grievous that no single
thing on earth is comparable to it; and therefore, if I am to
plead their cause, I must have recourse to fiction, and put to-
gether a figure made up of many things, like the fabulous
unions of goats and stags which are found in pictures. Imag-
ine then a fleet or a ship in which there is a captain who is taller
and stronger than any of the crew, but he is a little deaf and
has a similar infirmity in sight, and his knowledge of navigation
is not much better. The sailors are quarrelling with one an-
other about the steering--everyone is of opinion that he has a
right to steer, though he has never learned the art of naviga-
tion and cannot tell who taught him or when he learned, and
will further assert that it cannot be taught, and they are ready
to cut in pieces anyone who says the contrary. They throng
about the captain, begging and praying him to commit the helm
to them; and if at any time they do not prevail, but others are
preferred to them, they kill the others or throw them overboard,
and having first chained up the noble captain's senses with
drink or some narcotic drug, they mutiny and take possession
of the ship and make free with the stores; thus, eating and
drinking, they proceed on their voyage in such manner as might
be expected of them. Him who is their partisan and cleverly
aids them in their plot for getting the ship out of the captain's
hands into their own whether by force or persuasion, they com-
pliment with the name of sailor, pilot, able seaman, and abuse
the other sort of man, whom they call a good-for-nothing; but
that the true pilot must pay attention to the year and seasons
and sky and stars and winds, and whatever else belongs to his
art, if he intends to be really qualified for the command of a
ship, and that he must and will be the steerer, whether other
people like or not--the possibility of this union of authority
with the steerer's art has never seriously entered into their
thoughts or been made part of their calling. Now in vessels
which are in a state of mutiny and by sailors who are mutineers,
how will the true pilot be regarded? Will he not be called by
them a prater, a star-gazer, a good-for-nothing?

  Of course, said Adeimantus.

  Then you will hardly need, I said, to hear the interpretation
of the figure, which describes the true philosopher in his rela-
tion to the State; for you understand already.

  Certainly.

  Then suppose you now take this parable to the gentleman
who is surprised at finding that philosophers have no honor
in their cities; explain it to him and try to convince him that
their having honor would be far more extraordinary.

  I will.

  Say to him, that, in deeming the best votaries of philosophy
to be useless to the rest of the world, he is right; but also tell
him to attribute their uselessness to the fault of those who will
not use them, and not to themselves. The pilot should not
humbly beg the sailors to be commanded by him--that is not
the order of nature; neither are "the wise to go to the doors
of the rich"--the ingenious author of this saying told a lie--
but the truth is, that, when a man is ill, whether he be rich or
poor, to the physician he must go, and he who wants to be gov-
erned, to him who is able to govern. The ruler who is good
for anything ought not to beg his subjects to be ruled by him;
although the present governors of mankind are of a different
stamp; they may be justly compared to the mutinous sailors,
and the true helmsmen to those who are called by them good-
for-nothings and star-gazers.

  Precisely so, he said.

  For these reasons, and among men like these, philosophy,
the noblest pursuit of all, is not likely to be much esteemed by
those of the opposite faction; not that the greatest and most
lasting injury is done to her by her opponents, but by her own
professing followers, the same of whom you suppose the ac-
cuser to say that the greater number of them are arrant rogues,
and the best are useless; in which opinion I agreed.

  Yes.

  And the reason why the good are useless has now been ex-
plained?

  True.

  Then shall we proceed to show that the corruption of the
majority is also unavoidable, and that this is not to be laid to
the charge of philosophy any more than the other?

  By all means.

  And let us ask and answer in turn, first going back to the
description of the gentle and noble nature. Truth, as you will
remember, was his leader, whom he followed always and in all
things; failing in this, he was an impostor, and had no part or
lot in true philosophy.

  Yes, that was said.

  Well, and is not this one quality, to mention no others, greatly
at variance with present notions of him?

  Certainly, he said.

  And have we not a right to say in his defence, that the true
lover of knowledge is always striving after being--that is his
nature; he will not rest in the multiplicity of individuals which
is an appearance only, but will go on--the keen edge will not
be blunted, nor the force of his desire abate until he have at-
tained the knowledge of the true nature of every essence by a
sympathetic and kindred power in the soul, and by that power
drawing near and mingling and becoming incorporate with
very being, having begotten mind and truth, he will have knowl-
edge and will live and grow truly, and then, and not till then,
will he cease from his travail.

  Nothing, he said, can be more just than such a description
of him.

  And will the love of a lie be any part of a philosopher's
nature? Will he not utterly hate a lie?

  He will.

  And when truth is the captain, we cannot suspect any evil
of the band which he leads?

  Impossible.

  Justice and health of mind will be of the company, and tem-
perance will follow after?

  True, he replied.

  Neither is there any reason why I should again set in array
the philosopher's virtues, as you will doubtless remember that
courage, magnificence, apprehension, memory, were his natural
gifts. And you objected that, although no one could deny
what I then said, still, if you leave words and look at facts,
the persons who are thus described are some of them manifestly
useless, and the greater number utterly depraved, we were then
led to inquire into the grounds of these accusations, and have
now arrived at the point of asking why are the majority bad,
which question of necessity brought us back to the examination
and definition of the true philosopher.

  Exactly.

  And we have next to consider the corruptions of the philo-
sophic nature, why so many are spoiled and so few escape spoil-
ing--I am speaking of those who were said to be useless but
not wicked--and, when we have done with them, we will speak
of the imitators of philosophy, what manner of men are they
who aspire after a profession which is above them and of which
they are unworthy, and then, by their manifold inconsistencies,
bring upon philosophy and upon all philosophers that universal
reprobation of which we speak.

  What are these corruptions? he said.

  I will see if I can explain them to you. Everyone will admit
that a nature having in perfection all the qualities which we re-
quired in a philosopher is a rare plant which is seldom seen
among men?

  Rare indeed.

  And what numberless and powerful causes tend to destroy
these rare natures!

  What causes?

  In the first place there are their own virtues, their courage,
temperance, and the rest of them, every one of which praise-
worthy qualities (and this is a most singular circumstance)
destroys and distracts from philosophy the soul which is the
possessor of them.

  That is very singular, he replied.

  Then there are all the ordinary goods of life--beauty, wealth,
strength, rank, and great connections in the State--you under-
stand the sort of things--these also have a corrupting and dis-
tracting effect.

  I understand; but I should like to know more precisely what
you mean about them.

  Grasp the truth as a whole, I said, and in the right way; you
will then have no difficulty in apprehending the preceding re-
marks, and they will no longer appear strange to you.

  And how am I to do so? he asked.

  Why, I said, we know that all germs or seeds, whether vege-
table or animal, when they fail to meet with proper nutriment,
or climate, or soil, in proportion to their vigor, are all the more
sensitive to the want of a suitable environment, for evil is a
greater enemy to what is good than to what is not.

  Very true.

  There is reason in supposing that the finest natures, when
under alien conditions, receive more injury than the inferior,
because the contrast is greater.

  Certainly.

  And may we not say, Adeimantus, that the most gifted
minds, when they are ill-educated, become pre-eminently bad?
Do not great crimes and the spirit of pure evil spring out of
a fulness of nature ruined by education rather than from any
inferiority, whereas weak natures are scarcely capable of any
very great good or very great evil?

  There I think that you are right.

  And our philosopher follows the same analogy--he is like
a plant which, having proper nurture, must necessarily grow
and mature into all virtue, but, if sown and planted in an alien
soil, becomes the most noxious of all weeds, unless he be pre-
served by some divine power. Do you really think, as people
so often say, that our youth are corrupted by Sophists, or that
private teachers of the art corrupt them in any degree worth
speaking of? Are not the public who say these things the
greatest of all Sophists? And do they not educate to perfec-
tion young and old, men and women alike, and fashion them
after their own hearts?

  When is this accomplished? he said.

  When they meet together, and the world sits down at an
assembly, or in a court of law, or a theatre, or a camp, or in any
other popular resort, and there is a great uproar, and they
praise some things which are being said or done, and blame
other things, equally exaggerating both, shouting and clap-
ping their hands, and the echo of the rocks and the place in
which they are assembled redoubles the sound of the praise or
blame--at such a time will not a young man's heart, as they
say, leap within him? Will any private training enable him
to stand firm against the overwhelming flood of popular opin-
ion? or will he be carried away by the stream? Will he not
have the notions of good and evil which the public in general
have--he will do as they do, and as they are, such will he be?

  Yes, Socrates; necessity will compel him.

  And yet, I said, there is a still greater necessity, which has
not been mentioned.

  What is that?

  The gentle force of attainder, or confiscation, or death,
which, as you are aware, these new Sophists and educators,
who are the public, apply when their words are powerless.

  Indeed they do; and in right good earnest.

  Now what opinion of any other Sophist, or of any private
person, can be expected to overcome in such an unequal con-
test?

  None, he replied.

  No, indeed, I said, even to make the attempt is a great piece
of folly; there neither is, nor has been, nor is ever likely to be,
any different type of character which has had no other train-
ing in virtue but that which is supplied by public opinion--
I speak, my friend, of human virtue only; what is more than
human, as the proverb says, is not included: for I would not
have you ignorant that, in the present evil state of govern-
ments, whatever is saved and comes to good is saved by the
power of God, as we may truly say.

  I quite assent, he replied.

  Then let me crave your assent also to a further observation.

  What are you going to say?

  Why, that all those mercenary individuals, whom the many
call Sophists and whom they deem to be their adversaries, do,
in fact, teach nothing but the opinion of the many, that is to
say, the opinions of their assemblies; and this is their wisdom.
I might compare them to a man who should study the tempers
and desires of a mighty strong beast who is fed by him--he
would learn how to approach and handle him, also at what times
and from what causes he is dangerous or the reverse, and what
is the meaning of his several cries, and by what sounds, when
another utters them, he is soothed or infuriated; and you may
suppose further, that when, by continually attending upon him,
he has become perfect in all this, he calls his knowledge wis-
dom, and makes of it a system or art, which he proceeds to
teach, although he has no real notion of what he means by the
principles or passions of which he is speaking, but calls this
honorable and that dishonorable, or good or evil, or just or
unjust, all in accordance with the tastes and tempers of the
great brute. Good he pronounces to be that in which the beast
delights, and evil to be that which he dislikes; and he can give
no other account of them except that the just and noble are the
necessary, having never himself seen, and having no power of
explaining to others, the nature of either, or the difference be-
tween them, which is immense. By heaven, would not such
a one be a rare educator?

  Indeed, he would.

  And in what way does he who thinks that wisdom is the dis-
cernment of the tempers and tastes of the motley multitude,
whether in painting or in music, or, finally, in politics, differ
from him whom I have been describing? For when a man
consorts with the many, and exhibits to them his poem or other
work of art or the service which he has done the State, making
them his judges when he is not obliged, the so-called necessity
of Diomede will oblige him to produce whatever they praise.
And yet the reasons are utterly ludicrous which they give in
confirmation of their own notions about the honorable and
good. Did you ever hear any of them which were not?

  No, nor am I likely to hear.

  You recognize the truth of what I have been saying? Then
let me ask you to consider further whether the world will ever
be induced to believe in the existence of absolute beauty rather
than of the many beautiful, or of the absolute in each kind
rather than of the many in each kind?

  Certainly not.

  Then the world cannot possibly be a philosopher?

  Impossible.

  And therefore philosophers must inevitably fall under the
censure of the world?

  They must.

  And of individuals who consort with the mob and seek to
please them?

  That is evident.

  Then, do you see any way in which the philosopher can be
preserved in his calling to the end?--and remember what we
were saying of him, that he was to have quickness and memory
and courage and magnificence--these were admitted by us to
be the true philosopher's gifts.

  Yes.

  Will not such an one from his early childhood be in all things
first among us all, especially if his bodily endowments are like
his mental ones?

  Certainly, he said.

  And his friends and fellow-citizens will want to use him as
he gets older for their own purposes?

  No question.

  Falling at his feet, they will make requests to him and do
him honor and flatter him, because they want to get into their
hands now the power which he will one day possess.

  That often happens, he said.

  And what will a man such as he is be likely to do under such
circumstances, especially if he be a citizen of a great city, rich
and noble, and a tall, proper youth? Will he not be full of
boundless aspirations, and fancy himself able to manage the
affairs of Hellenes and of barbarians, and having got such no-
tions into his head will he not dilate and elevate himself in the
fulness of vain pomp and senseless pride?

  To be sure he will.

  Now, when he is in this state of mind, if someone gently
comes to him and tells him that he is a fool and must get under-
standing, which can only be got by slaving for it, do you think
that, under such adverse circumstances, he will be easily in-
duced to listen?

  Far otherwise.

  And even if there be someone who through inherent good-
ness or natural reasonableness has had his eyes opened a little
and is humbled and taken captive by philosophy, how will his
friends behave when they think that they are likely to lose the
advantage which they were hoping to reap from his compan-
ionship? Will they not do and say anything to prevent him
from yielding to his better nature and to render his teacher
powerless, using to this end private intrigues as well as public
prosecutions?

  There can be no doubt of it.

  And how can one who is thus circumstanced ever become
a philosopher?

  Impossible.

  Then were we not right in saying that even the very qualities
which make a man a philosopher, may, if he be ill-educated,
divert him from philosophy, no less than riches and their ac-
companiments and the other so-called goods of life?

  We were quite right.

  Thus, my excellent friend, is brought about all that ruin and
failure which I have been describing of the natures best adapted
to the best of all pursuits; they are natures which we maintain
to be rare at any time; this being the class out of which come
the men who are the authors of the greatest evil to States and
individuals; and also of the greatest good when the tide carries
them in that direction; but a small man never was the doer of
any great thing either to individuals or to States.

  That is most true, he said.

  And so philosophy is left desolate, with her marriage rite
incomplete: for her own have fallen away and forsaken her,
and while they are leading a false and unbecoming life, other
unworthy persons, seeing that she has no kinsmen to be her
protectors, enter in and dishonor her; and fasten upon her the
reproaches which, as you say, her reprovers utter, who affirm
of her votaries that some are good for nothing, and that the
greater number deserve the severest punishment.

  That is certainly what people say.

  Yes; and what else would you expect, I said, when you think
of the puny creatures who, seeing this land open to them--a
land well stocked with fair names and showy titles--like pris-
oners running out of prison into a sanctuary, take a leap out
of their trades into philosophy; those who do so being probably
the cleverest hands at their own miserable crafts? For, al-
though philosophy be in this evil case, still there remains a dig-
nity about her which is not to be found in the arts. And many
are thus attracted by her whose natures are imperfect and whose
souls are maimed and disfigured by their meannesses, as their
bodies are by their trades and crafts. Is not this unavoidable?

  Yes.

  Are they not exactly like a bald little tinker who has just got
out of durance and come into a fortune--he takes a bath and
puts on a new coat, and is decked out as a bridegroom going to
marry his master's daughter, who is left poor and desolate?

  A most exact parallel.

  What will be the issue of such marriages? Will they not
be vile and bastard?

  There can be no question of it.

  And when persons who are unworthy of education approach
philosophy and make an alliance with her who is in a rank above
them, what sort of ideas and opinions are likely to be gener-
ated? Will they not be sophisms captivating to the ear,
having nothing in them genuine, or worthy of or akin to true
wisdom?

  No doubt, he said.

  Then, Adeimantus, I said, the worthy disciples of philosophy
will be but a small remnant: perchance some noble and well-
educated person, detained by exile in her service, who in the
absence of corrupting influences remains devoted to her; or
some lofty soul born in a mean city, the politics of which he
contemns and neglects; and there may be a gifted few who
leave the arts, which they justly despise, and come to her; or
peradventure there are some who are restrained by our friend
Theages's bridle; for everything in the life of Theages con-
spired to divert him from philosophy; but ill-health kept him
away from politics. My own case of the internal sign is hard-
ly worth mentioning, for rarely, if ever, has such a monitor been
given to any other man. Those who belong to this small class
have tasted how sweet and blessed a possession philosophy is,
and have also seen enough of the madness of the multitude;
and they know that no politician is honest, nor is there any
champion of justice at whose side they may fight and be saved.
Such a one may be compared to a man who has fallen among
wild beasts--he will not join in the wickedness of his fellows,
but neither is he able singly to resist all their fierce natures, and
therefore seeing that he would be of no use to the State or to
his friends, and reflecting that he would have to throw away his
life without doing any good either to himself or others, he holds
his peace, and goes his own way. He is like one who, in the
storm of dust and sleet which the driving wind hurries along,
retires under the shelter of a wall; and seeing the rest of man-
kind full of wickedness, he is content, if only he can live his
own life and be pure from evil or unrighteousness, and depart
in peace and good-will, with bright hopes.

  Yes, he said, and he will have done a great work before he
departs.

  A great work--yes; but not the greatest, unless he find a
State suitable to him; for in a State which is suitable to him,
he will have a larger growth and be the saviour of his country,
as well as of himself.

  The causes why philosophy is in such an evil name have
now been sufficiently explained: the injustice of the charges
against her has been shown--is there anything more which you
wish to say?

  Nothing more on that subject, he replied; but I should like
to know which of the governments now existing is in your
opinion the one adapted to her.

  Not any of them, I said; and that is precisely the accusation
which I bring against them--not one of them is worthy of the
philosophic nature, and hence that nature is warped and es-
tranged; as the exotic seed which is sown in a foreign land
becomes denaturalized, and is wont to be overpowered and to
lose itself in the new soil, even so this growth of philosophy,
instead of persisting, degenerates and receives another charac-
ter. But if philosophy ever finds in the State that perfec-
tion which she herself is, then will be seen that she is in truth
divine, and that all other things, whether natures of men or
institutions, are but human; and now, I know that you are
going to ask, What that State is:

  No, he said; there you are wrong, for I was going to ask
another question--whether it is the State of which we are the
founders and inventors, or some other?

  Yes, I replied, ours in most respects; but you may remember
my saying before, that some living authority would always be
required in the State having the same idea of the constitution
which guided you when as legislator you were laying down the
laws.

  That was said, he replied.

  Yes, but not in a satisfactory manner; you frightened us by
interposing objections, which certainly showed that the dis-
cussion would be long and difficult; and what still remains is
the reverse of easy.

  What is there remaining?

  The question how the study of philosophy may be so ordered
as not to be the ruin of the State: All great attempts are at-
tended with risk; "hard is the good," as men say.

  Still, he said, let the point be cleared up, and the inquiry
will then be complete.

  I shall not be hindered, I said, by any want of will, but, if
at all, by a want of power: my zeal you may see for yourselves;
and please to remark in what I am about to say how boldly and
unhesitatingly I declare that States should pursue philosophy,
not as they do now, but in a different spirit.

  In what manner?

  At present, I said, the students of philosophy are quite young;
beginning when they are hardly past childhood, they devote
only the time saved from money-making and housekeeping to
such pursuits; and even those of them who are reputed to have
most of the philosophic spirit, when they come within sight of
the great difficulty of the subject, I mean dialectic, take them-
selves off. In after life, when invited by someone else, they
may, perhaps, go and hear a lecture, and about this they make
much ado, for philosophy is not considered by them to be their
proper business: at last, when they grow old, in most cases they
are extinguished more truly than Heracleitus's sun, inasmuch
as they never light up again.

  But what ought to be their course?

  Just the opposite. In childhood and youth their study, and
what philosophy they learn, should be suited to their tender
years: during this period while they are growing up toward
manhood, the chief and special care should be given to their
bodies that they may have them to use in the service of philoso-
phy; as life advances and the intellect begins to mature, let them
increase the gymnastics of the soul; but when the strength of
our citizens fails and is past civil and military duties, then let
them range at will and engage in no serious labor, as we intend
them to live happily here, and to crown this life with a similar
happiness in another.

  How truly in earnest you are, Socrates! he said; I am sure
of that; and yet most of your hearers, if I am not mistaken,
are likely to be still more earnest in their opposition to you,
and will never be convinced; Thrasymachus least of all.

  Do not make a quarrel, I said, between Thrasymachus and
me, who have recently become friends, although, indeed, we
were never enemies; for I shall go on striving to the utmost
until I either convert him and other men, or do something which
may profit them against the day when they live again, and hold
the like discourse in another state of existence.

  You are speaking of a time which is not very near.

  Rather, I replied, of a time which is as nothing in comparison
with eternity. Nevertheless, I do not wonder that the many
refuse to believe; for they have never seen that of which we
are now speaking realized; they have seen only a conven-
tional imitation of philosophy, consisting of words artificially
brought together, not like these of ours having a natural unity.
But a human being who in word and work is perfectly moulded,
as far as he can be, into the proportion and likeness of virtue--
such a man ruling in a city which bears the same image, they
have never yet seen, neither one nor many of them--do you
think that they ever did?

  No indeed.

  No, my friend, and they have seldom, if ever, heard free and
noble sentiments; such as men utter when they are earnestly
and by every means in their power seeking after truth for the
sake of knowledge, while they look coldly on the subtleties
of controversy, of which the end is opinion and strife, whether
they meet with them in the courts of law or in society.

  They are strangers, he said, to the words of which you
speak.

  And this was what we foresaw, and this was the reason why
truth forced us to admit, not without fear and hesitation, that
neither cities nor States nor individuals will ever attain perfec-
tion until the small class of philosophers whom we termed use-
less but not corrupt are providentially compelled, whether they
will or not, to take care of the State, and until a like necessity
be laid on the State to obey them; or until kings, or if not
kings, the sons of kings or princes, are divinely inspired with
a true love of true philosophy. That either or both of these
alternatives are impossible, I see no reason to affirm: if they
were so, we might indeed be justly ridiculed as dreamers and
visionaries. Am I not right?

  Quite right.

  If then, in the countless ages of the past, or at the present
hour in some foreign clime which is far away and beyond our
ken, the perfected philosopher is or has been or hereafter shall
be compelled by a superior power to have the charge of the
State, we are ready to assert to the death, that this our consti-
tution has been, and is--yea, and will be whenever the muse of
philosophy is queen. There is no impossibility in all this; that
there is a difficulty, we acknowledge ourselves.

  My opinion agrees with yours, he said.

  But do you mean to say that this is not the opinion of the
multitude?

  I should imagine not, he replied.

  O my friends, I said, do not attack the multitude: they will
change their minds, if, not in an aggressive spirit, but gently
and with the view of soothing them and removing their dislike
of over-education, you show them your philosophers as they
really are and describe as you were just now doing their charac-
ter and profession, and then mankind will see that he of whom
you are speaking is not such as they supposed--if they view
him in this new light, they will surely change their notion of
him, and answer in another strain. Who can be at enmity
with one who loves him, who that is himself gentle and free
from envy will be jealous of one in whom there is no jealousy?
Nay, let me answer for you, that in a few this harsh temper may
be found, but not in the majority of mankind.

  I quite agree with you, he said.

  And do you not also think, as I do, that the harsh feeling
which the many entertain toward philosophy originates in the
pretenders, who rush in uninvited, and are always abusing
them, and finding fault with them, who make persons instead
of things the theme of their conversation? and nothing can be
more unbecoming in philosophers than this.

  It is most unbecoming.

  For he, Adeimantus, whose mind is fixed upon true being,
has surely no time to look down upon the affairs of earth, or
to be filled with malice and envy, contending against men; his
eye is ever directed toward things fixed and immutable, which
he sees neither injuring nor injured by one another, but all in
order moving according to reason; these he imitates, and to
these he will, as far as he can, conform himself. Can a man
help imitating that with which he holds reverential converse?

  Impossible.

  And the philosopher holding converse with the divine order,
becomes orderly and divine, as far as the nature of man allows;
but like everyone else, he will suffer from detraction.

  Of course.

  And if a necessity be laid upon him of fashioning, not only
himself, but human nature generally, whether in States or indi-
viduals, into that which he beholds elsewhere, will be, think
you, be an unskilful artificer of justice, temperance, and every
civil virtue?

  Anything but unskilful.

  And if the world perceives that what we are saying about
him is the truth, will they be angry with philosophy? Will
they disbelieve us, when we tell them that no State can be happy
which is not designed by artists who imitate the heavenly pat-
tern?

  They will not be angry if they understand, he said. But how
will they draw out the plan of which you are speaking?

  They will begin by taking the State and the manners of men,
from which, as from a tablet, they will rub out the picture, and
leave a clean surface. This is no easy task. But whether easy
or not, herein will lie the difference between them and every
other legislator--they will have nothing to do either with in-
dividual or State, and will inscribe no laws, until they have
either found, or themselves made, a clean surface.

  They will be very right, he said.

  Having effected this, they will proceed to trace an outline
of the constitution?

  No doubt.

  And when they are filling in the work, as I conceive, they will
often turn their eyes upward and downward: I mean that they
will first look at absolute justice and beauty and temperance,
and again at the human copy; and will mingle and temper the
various elements of life into the image of a man; and this they
will conceive according to that other image, which, when exist-
ing among men, Homer calls the form and likeness of God.

  Very true, he said.

  And one feature they will erase, and another they will put
in, until they have made the ways of men, as far as possible,
agreeable to the ways of God?

  Indeed, he said, in no way could they make a fairer picture.

  And now, I said, are we beginning to persuade those whom
you described as rushing at us with might and main, that the
painter of constitutions is such a one as we were praising; at
whom they were so very indignant because to his hands we
committed the State; and are they growing a little calmer at
what they have just heard?

  Much calmer, if there is any sense in them.

  Why, where can they still find any ground for objection?
Will they doubt that the philosopher is a lover of truth and
being?

  They would not be so unreasonable.

  Or that his nature, being such as we have delineated, is akin
to the highest good?

  Neither can they doubt this.

  But again, will they tell us that such a nature, placed under
favorable circumstances, will not be perfectly good and wise if
any ever was? Or will they prefer those whom we have re-
jected?

  Surely not.

  Then will they still be angry at our saying, that, until philoso-
phers bear rule, States and individuals will have no rest from
evil, nor will this our imaginary State ever be realized?

  I think that they will be less angry.

  Shall we assume that they are not only less angry but quite
gentle, and that they have been converted and for very shame,
if for no other reason, cannot refuse to come to terms?

  By all means, he said.

  Then let us suppose that the reconciliation has been effected.
Will anyone deny the other point, that there may be sons of
kings or princes who are by nature philosophers?

  Surely no man, he said.

  And when they have come into being will anyone say that
they must of necessity be destroyed; that they can hardly be
saved is not denied even by us; but that in the whole course
of ages no single one of them can escape--who will venture to
affirm this?

  Who indeed!

  But, said I, one is enough; let there be one man who has a
city obedient to his will, and he might bring into existence the
ideal polity about which the world is so incredulous.

  Yes, one is enough.

  The ruler may impose the laws and institutions which we
have been describing, and the citizens may possibly be willing
to obey them?

  Certainly.

  And that others should approve, of what we approve, is no
miracle or impossibility?

  I think not.

  But we have sufficiently shown, in what has preceded, that
all this, if only possible, is assuredly for the best.

  We have.

  And now we say not only that our laws, if they could be en-
acted, would be for the best, but also that the enactment of
them, though difficult, is not impossible.

  Very good.

  And so with pain and toil we have reached the end of one
subject, but more remains to be discussed; how and by what
studies and pursuits will the saviours of the constitution be
created, and at what ages are they to apply themselves to their
several studies?

  Certainly.

  I omitted the troublesome business of the possession of
women, and the procreation of children, and the appointment
of the rulers, because I knew that the perfect State would be
eyed with jealousy and was difficult of attainment; but that
piece of cleverness was not of much service to me, for I had
to discuss them all the same. The women and children are
now disposed of, but the other question of the rulers must be
investigated from the very beginning. We were saying, as
you will remember, that they were to be lovers of their country,
tried by the test of pleasures and pains, and neither in hard-
ships, nor in dangers, nor at any other critical moment were to
lose their patriotism--he was to be rejected who failed, but he
who always came forth pure, like gold tried in the refiner's fire,
was to be made a ruler, and to receive honors and rewards in
life and after death. This was the sort of thing which was
being said, and then the argument turned aside and veiled her
face; not liking to stir the question which has now arisen.

  I perfectly remember, he said.

  Yes, my friend, I said, and I then shrank from hazarding
the bold word; but now let me dare to say--that the perfect
guardian must be a philosopher.

  Yes, he said, let that be affirmed.

  And do not suppose that there will be many of them; for the
gifts which were deemed by us to be essential rarely grow to-
gether; they are mostly found in shreds and patches.

  What do you mean? he said.

  You are aware, I replied, that quick intelligence, memory,
sagacity, cleverness, and similar qualities, do not often grow
together, and that persons who possess them and are at the same
time high-spirited and magnanimous are not so constituted
by nature as to live orderly and in a peaceful and settled man-
ner; they are driven any way by their impulses, and all solid
principle goes out of them.

  Very true, he said.

  On the other hand, those steadfast natures which can better
be depended upon, which in a battle are impregnable to fear
and immovable, are equally immovable when there is anything
to be learned; they are always in a torpid state, and are apt to
yawn and go to sleep over any intellectual toil.

  Quite true.

  And yet we were saying that both qualities were necessary in
those to whom the higher education is to be imparted, and who
are to share in any office or command.

  Certainly, he said.

  And will they be a class which is rarely found?

  Yes, indeed.

  Then the aspirant must not only be tested in those labors
and dangers and pleasures which we mentioned before, but
there is another kind of probation which we did not mention--
he must be exercised also in many kinds of knowledge, to see
whether the soul will be able to endure the highest of all, or will
faint under them, as in any other studies and exercises.

  Yes, he said, you are quite right in testing them. But what
do you mean by the highest of all knowledge?

  You may remember, I said, that we divided the soul into
three parts; and distinguished the several natures of justice,
temperance, courage, and wisdom?

  Indeed, he said, if I had forgotten, I should not deserve to
hear more.

  And do you remember the word of caution which preceded
the discussion of them?

  To what do you refer?

  We were saying, if I am not mistaken, that he who wanted
to see them in their perfect beauty must take a longer and more
circuitous way, at the end of which they would appear; but that
we could add on a popular exposition of them on a level with
the discussion which had preceded. And you replied that
such an exposition would be enough for you, and so the in-
quiry was continued in what to me seemed to be a very inac-
curate manner; whether you were satisfied or not, it is for
you to say.

  Yes, he said, I thought and the others thought that you gave
us a fair measure of truth.

  But, my friend, I said, a measure of such things which in
any degree falls short of the whole truth is not fair measure;
for nothing imperfect is the measure of anything, although per-
sons are too apt to be contented and think that they need search
no further.

  Not an uncommon case when people are indolent.

  Yes, I said; and there cannot be any worse fault in a guardian
of the State and of the laws.

  True.

  The guardian then, I said, must be required to take the longer
circuit, and toil at learning as well as at gymnastics, or he will
never reach the highest knowledge of all which, as we were
just now saying, is his proper calling.

  What, he said, is there a knowledge still higher than this--
higher than justice and the other virtues?

  Yes, I said, there is. And of the virtues too we must behold
not the outline merely, as at present--nothing short of the most
finished picture should satisfy us. When little things are elab-
orated with an infinity of pains, in order that they may appear
in their full beauty and utmost clearness, how ridiculous that
we should not think the highest truths worthy of attaining the
highest accuracy!

  A right noble thought; but do you suppose that we shall
refrain from asking you what is this highest knowledge?

  Nay, I said, ask if you will; but I am certain that you have
heard the answer many times, and now you either do not under-
stand me or, as I rather think, you are disposed to be trouble-
some; for you have often been told that the idea of good is the
highest knowledge, and that all other things become useful
and advantageous only by their use of this. You can hardly be
ignorant that of this I was about to speak, concerning which,
as you have often heard me say, we know so little; and, without
which, any other knowledge or possession of any kind will
profit us nothing. Do you think that the possession of all
other things is of any value if we do not possess the good? or
the knowledge of all other things if we have no knowledge of
beauty and goodness?

  Assuredly not.

  You are further aware that most people affirm pleasure to
be the good, but the finer sort of wits say it is knowledge?

  Yes.

  And you are aware too that the latter cannot explain what
they mean by knowledge, but are obliged after all to say knowl-
edge of the good?

  How ridiculous!

  Yes, I said, that they should begin by reproaching us with
our ignorance of the good, and then presume our knowledge
of it--for the good they define to be knowledge of the good,
just as if we understood them when they use the term "good"
--this is of course ridiculous.

  Most true, he said.

  And those who make pleasure their good are in equal per-
plexity; for they are compelled to admit that there are bad
pleasures as well as good.

  Certainly.

  And therefore to acknowledge that bad and good are the
same?

  True.

  There can be no doubt about the numerous difficulties in
which this question is involved.

  There can be none.

  Further, do we not see that many are willing to do or to
have or to seem to be what is just and honorable without the
reality; but no one is satisfied with the appearance of good--
the reality is what they seek; in the case of the good, appear-
ance is despised by everyone.

  Very true, he said.

  Of this then, which every soul of man pursues and makes
the end of all his actions, having a presentiment that there is
such an end, and yet hesitating because neither knowing the
nature nor having the same assurance of this as of other things,
and therefore losing whatever good there is in other things--
of a principle such and so great as this ought the best men in
our State, to whom everything is intrusted, to be in the dark-
ness of ignorance?

  Certainly not, he said.

  I am sure, I said, that he who does not know how the beauti-
ful and the just are likewise good will be but a sorry guardian
of them; and I suspect that no one who is ignorant of the good
will have a true knowledge of them.

  That, he said, is a shrewd suspicion of yours.

  And if we only have a guardian who has this knowledge, our
State will be perfectly ordered?

  Of course, he replied; but I wish that you would tell me
whether you conceive this supreme principle of the good to be
knowledge or pleasure, or different from either?

  Aye, I said, I knew all along that a fastidious gentleman
like you would not be contented with the thoughts of other
people about these matters.

  True, Socrates; but I must say that one who like you has
passed a lifetime in the study of philosophy should not be al-
ways repeating the opinions of others, and never telling his
own.

  Well, but has anyone a right to say positively what he does
not know?

  Not, he said, with the assurance of positive certainty; he has
no right to do that: but he may say what he thinks, as a matter
of opinion.

  And do you not know, I said, that all mere opinions are bad,
and the best of them blind? You would not deny that those
who have any true notion without intelligence are only like
blind men who feel their way along the road?

  Very true.

  And do you wish to behold what is blind and crooked and
base, when others will tell you of brightness and beauty?

  Still, I must implore you, Socrates, said Glaucon, not to turn
away just as you are reaching the goal; if you will only give
such an explanation of the good as you have already given of
justice and temperance and the other virtues, we shall be sat-
isfied.

  Yes, my friend, and I shall be at least equally satisfied, but
I cannot help fearing that I shall fail, and that my indiscreet
zeal will bring ridicule upon me. No, sweet sirs, let us not
at present ask what is the actual nature of the good, for to reach
what is now in my thoughts would be an effort too great for
me. But of the child of the good who is likest him, I would
fain speak, if I could be sure that you wished to hear--other-
wise, not.

  By all means, he said, tell us about the child, and you shall
remain in our debt for the account of the parent.

  I do indeed wish, I replied, that I could pay, and you receive,
the account of the parent, and not, as now, of the offspring
only; take, however, this latter by way of interest, and at the
same time have a care that I do not render a false account, al-
though I have no intention of deceiving you.

  Yes, we will take all the care that we can: proceed.

  Yes, I said, but I must first come to an understanding with
you, and remind you of what I have mentioned in the course
of this discussion, and at many other times.

  What?

  The old story, that there is many a beautiful and many a
good, and so of other things which we describe and define;
to all of them the term "many" is implied.

  True, he said.

  And there is an absolute beauty and an absolute good, and
of other things to which the term "many" is applied there is
an absolute; for they may be brought under a single idea, which
is called the essence of each.

  Very true.

  The many, as we say, are seen but not known, and the ideas
are known but not seen.

  Exactly.

  And what is the organ with which we see the visible things?

  The sight, he said.

  And with the hearing, I said, we hear, and with the other
senses perceive the other objects of sense?

  True.

  But have you remarked that sight is by far the most costly
and complex piece of workmanship which the artificer of the
senses ever contrived?

  No, I never have, he said.

  Then reflect: has the ear or voice need of any third or addi-
tional nature in order that the one may be able to hear and the
other to be heard?

  Nothing of the sort.

  No, indeed, I replied; and the same is true of most, if not all,
the other senses--you would not say that any of them requires
such an addition?

  Certainly not.

  But you see that without the addition of some other nature
there is no seeing or being seen?

  How do you mean?

  Sight being, as I conceive, in the eyes, and he who has eyes
wanting to see; color being also present in them, still unless
there be a third nature specially adapted to the purpose, the
owner of the eyes will see nothing and the colors will be invisi-
ble.

  Of what nature are you speaking?

  Of that which you term light, I replied.

  True, he said.

  Noble, then, is the bond which links together sight and visi-
bility, and great beyond other bonds by no small difference of
nature; for light is their bond, and light is no ignoble thing?

  Nay, he said, the reverse of ignoble.

  And which, I said, of the gods in heaven would you say was
the lord of this element? Whose is that light which makes
the eye to see perfectly and the visible to appear?

  You mean the sun, as you and all mankind say.

  May not the relation of sight to this deity be described as
follows?

  How?

  Neither sight nor the eye in which sight resides is the sun?

  No.

  Yet of all the organs of sense the eye is the most like the
sun?

  By far the most like.

  And the power which the eye possesses is a sort of effluence
which is dispensed from the sun?

  Exactly.

  Then the sun is not sight, but the author of sight who is
recognized by sight?

  True, he said.

  And this is he whom I call the child of the good, whom the
good begat in his own likeness, to be in the visible world, in
relation to sight and the things of sight, what the good is in the
intellectual world in relation to mind and the things of mind:

  Will you be a little more explicit? he said.

  Why, you know, I said, that the eyes, when a person directs
them toward objects on which the light of day is no longer
shining, but the moon and stars only, see dimly, and are nearly
blind; they seem to have no clearness of vision in them?

  Very true.

  But when they are directed toward objects on which the sun
shines, they see clearly and there is sight in them?

  Certainly.

  And the soul is like the eye: when resting upon that on which
truth and being shine, the soul perceives and understands, and
is radiant with intelligence; but when turned toward the twi-
light of becoming and perishing, then she has opinion only,
and goes blinking about, and is first of one opinion and then of
another, and seems to have no intelligence?

  Just so.

  Now, that which imparts truth to the known and the power
of knowing to the knower is what I would have you term the
idea of good, and this you will deem to be the cause of science,
and of truth in so far as the latter becomes the subject of knowl-
edge; beautiful too, as are both truth and knowledge, you will
be right in esteeming this other nature as more beautiful than
either; and, as in the previous instance, light and sight may be
truly said to be like the sun, and yet not to be the sun, so in this
other sphere, science and truth may be deemed to be like the
good, but not the good; the good has a place of honor yet
higher.

  What a wonder of beauty that must be, he said, which is the
author of science and truth, and yet surpasses them in beauty;
for you surely cannot mean to say that pleasure is the good?

  God forbid, I replied; but may I ask you to consider the
image in another point of view?

  In what point of view?

  You would say, would you not? that the sun is not only the
author of visibility in all visible things, but of generation and
nourishment and growth, though he himself is not generation?

  Certainly.

  In like manner the good may be said to be not only the author
of knowledge to all things known, but of their being and es-
sence, and yet the good is not essence, but far exceeds essence
in dignity and power.

  Glaucon said, with a ludicrous earnestness: By the light of
heaven, how amazing!

  Yes, I said, and the exaggeration may be set down to you;
for you made me utter my fancies.

  And pray continue to utter them; at any rate let us hear if
there is anything more to be said about the similitude of the
sun.

  Yes, I said, there is a great deal more.

  Then omit nothing, however slight.

  I will do my best, I said; but I should think that a great deal
will have to be omitted.
I hope not, he said.

  You have to Imagine, then, that there are two ruling powers,
and that one of them is set over the intellectual world, the other
over the visible. I do not say heaven, lest you should fancy
that I am playing upon the name (ovpavos, opatos). May I
suppose that you have this distinction of the visible and intel-
ligible fixed in your mind?

  I have.

  Now take a line which has been cut into two unequal parts,
and divide each of them again in the same proportion, and sup-
pose the two main divisions to answer, one to the visible and
the other to the intelligible, and then compare the subdivisions
in respect of their clearness and want of clearness, and you will
find that the first section in the sphere of the visible consists of
images. And by images I mean, in the first place, shadows,
and in the second place, reflections in water and in solid, smooth
and polished bodies and the like: Do you understand?

  Yes, I understand.

  Imagine, now, the other section, of which this is only the re-
semblance, to include the animals which we see, and everything
that grows or is made.

  Very good.

  Would you not admit that both the sections of this division
have different degrees of truth, and that the copy is to the origi-
nal as the sphere of opinion is to the sphere of knowledge?

  Most undoubtedly.

  Next proceed to consider the manner in which the sphere of
the intellectual is to be divided.

  In what manner?

  Thus: There are two subdivisions, in the lower of which the
soul uses the figures given by the former division as images; the
inquiry can only be hypothetical, and instead of going upward
to a principle descends to the other end; in the higher of the
two, the soul passes out of hypotheses, and goes up to a princi-
ple which is above hypotheses, making no use of images as
in the former case, but proceeding only in and through the ideas
themselves.

  I do not quite understand your meaning, he said.

  Then I will try again; you will understand me better when
I have made some preliminary remarks. You are aware that
students of geometry, arithmetic, and the kindred sciences as-
sume the odd, and the even, and the figures, and three kinds of
angles, and the like, in their several branches of science; these
are their hypotheses, which they and everybody are supposed
to know, and therefore they do not deign to give any account
of them either to themselves or others; but they begin with
them, and go on until they arrive at last, and in a consistent
manner, at their conclusion?

  Yes, he said, I know.

  And do you not know also that although they make use of
the visible forms and reason about them, they are thinking not
of these, but of the ideals which they resemble; not of the figures
which they draw, but of the absolute square and the absolute
diameter, and so on--the forms which they draw or make, and
which have shadows and reflections in water of their own, are
converted by them into images, but they are really seeking to
behold the things themselves, which can only be seen with the
eye of the mind?

  That is true.

  And of this kind I spoke as the intelligible, although in the
search after it the soul is compelled to use hypotheses; not as-
cending to a first principle, because she is unable to rise above
the region of hypothesis, but employing the objects of which
the shadows below are resemblances in their turn as images,
they having in relation to the shadows and reflections of them a
greater distinctness, and therefore a higher value.

  I understand, he said, that you are speaking of the province
of geometry and the sister arts.

  And when I speak of the other division of the intelligible,
you will understand me to speak of that other sort of knowledge
which reason herself attains by the power of dialectic, using
the hypotheses not as first principles, but only as hypotheses--
that is to say, as steps and points of departure into a world
which is above hypotheses, in order that she may soar beyond
them to the first principle of the whole; and clinging to this
and then to that which depends on this, by successive steps she
descends again without the aid of any sensible object, from
ideas, through ideas, and in ideas she ends.

  I understand you, he replied; not perfectly, for you seem to
me to be describing a task which is really tremendous; but,
at any rate, I understand you to say that knowledge and being,
which the science of dialectic contemplates, are clearer than the
notions of the arts, as they are termed, which proceed from hy-
potheses only: these are also contemplated by the understand-
ing, and not by the senses: yet, because they start from hypoth-
eses and do not ascend to a principle, those who contemplate
them appear to you not to exercise the higher reason upon them,
although when a first principle is added to them they are cogniz-
able by the higher reason. And the habit which is concerned
with geometry and the cognate sciences I suppose that you
would term understanding, and not reason, as being intermedi-
ate between opinion and reason.

  You have quite conceived my meaning, I said; and now, cor-
responding to these four divisions, let there be four faculties
in the soul--reason answering to the highest, understanding
to the second, faith (or conviction) to the third, and perception
of shadows to the last--and let there be a scale of them, and
let us suppose that the several faculties have clearness in the
same degree that their objects have truth.

  I understand, he replied, and give my assent, and accept your
arrangement.


                        BOOK VII
        ON SHADOWS AND REALITIES IN EDUCATION

(SOCRATES, GLAUCON.)

  AND now, I said, let me show in a figure how far our
nature is enlightened or unenlightened: Behold! human
beings living in an underground den, which has a
mouth open toward the light and reaching all along the den;
here they have been from their childhood, and have their legs
and necks chained so that they cannot move, and can only see
before them, being prevented by the chains from turning round
their heads. Above and behind them a fire is blazing at a dis-
tance, and between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised
way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built along the
way, like the screen which marionette-players have in front of
them, over which they show the puppets.

  I see.

  And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying
all sorts of vessels, and statues and figures of animals made of
wood and stone and various materials, which appear over the
wall? Some of them are talking, others silent.

  You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange
prisoners.

  Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own
shadows, or the shadows of one another, which the fire throws
on the opposite wall of the cave?

  True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows
if they were never allowed to move their heads?

  And of the objects which are being carried in like manner
they would only see the shadows?

  Yes, he said.

  And if they were able to converse with one another, would
they not suppose that they were naming what was actually
before them?

  Very true.

  And suppose further that the prison had an echo which came
from the other side, would they not be sure to fancy when one
of the passers-by spoke that the voice which they heard came
from the passing shadow?

  No question, he replied.

  To them, I said, the truth would be literally nothing but the
shadows of the images.

  That is certain.

  And now look again, and see what will naturally follow if
the prisoners are released and disabused of their error. At
first, when any of them is liberated and compelled suddenly to
stand up and turn his neck round and walk and look toward the
light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him, and
he will be unable to see the realities of which in his former state
he had seen the shadows; and then conceive someone saying to
him, that what he saw before was an illusion, but that now,
when he is approaching nearer to being and his eye is turned
toward more real existence, he has a clearer vision--what will
be his reply? And you may further imagine that his instructor
is pointing to the objects as they pass and requiring him to
name them--will he not be perplexed? Will he not fancy that
the shadows which he formerly saw are truer than the objects
which are now shown to him?

  Far truer.

  And if he is compelled to look straight at the light, will he
not have a pain in his eyes which will make him turn away to
take refuge in the objects of vision which he can see, and which
he will conceive to be in reality clearer than the things which
are now being shown to him?

  True, he said.

  And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up
a steep and rugged ascent, and held fast until he is forced into
the presence of the sun himself, is he not likely to be pained and
irritated? When he approaches the light his eyes will be daz-
zled, and he will not be able to see anything at all of what are
now called realities.

  Not all in a moment, he said.

  He will require to grow accustomed to the sight of the upper
world. And first he will see the shadows best, next the reflec-
tions of men and other objects in the water, and then the objects
themselves; then he will gaze upon the light of the moon and
the stars and the spangled heaven; and he will see the sky and
the stars by night better than the sun or the light of the sun
by day?

  Certainly.

  Last of all he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflec-
tions of him in the water, but he will see him in his own proper
place, and not in another; and he will contemplate him as he is.

  Certainly.

  He will then proceed to argue that this is he who gives the
season and the years, and is the guardian of all that is in the
visible world, and in a certain way the cause of all things which
he and his fellows have been accustomed to behold?

  Clearly, he said, he would first see the sun and then reason
about him.

  And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom
of the den and his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that
he would felicitate himself on the change, and pity him?

  Certainly, he would.

  And if they were in the habit of conferring honors among
themselves on those who were quickest to observe the passing
shadows and to remark which of them went before, and which
followed after, and which were together; and who were there-
fore best able to draw conclusions as to the future, do you think
that he would care for such honors and glories, or envy the
possessors of them? Would he not say with Homer,

  "Better to be the poor servant of a poor master,"

and to endure anything, rather than think as they do and live
after their manner?

  Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything
than entertain these false notions and live in this miserable
manner.

  Imagine once more, I said, such a one coming suddenly out
of the sun to be replaced in his old situation; would he not be
certain to have his eyes full of darkness?

  To be sure, he said.

  And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in meas-
uring the shadows with the prisoners who had never moved out
of the den, while his sight was still weak, and before his eyes
had become steady (and the time which would be needed to
acquire this new habit of sight might be very considerable),
would he not be ridiculous? Men would say of him that up
he went and down he came without his eyes; and that it was
better not even to think of ascending; and if anyone tried to
loose another and lead him up to the light, let them only catch
the offender, and they would put him to death.

  No question, he said.

  This entire allegory, I said, you may now append, dear Glau-
con, to the previous argument; the prison-house is the world of
sight, the light of the fire is the sun, and you will not misap-
prehend me if you interpret the journey upward to be the ascent
of the soul into the intellectual world according to my poor
belief, which, at your desire, I have expressed--whether rightly
or wrongly, God knows. But, whether true or false, my opin-
ion is that in the world of knowledge the idea of good appears
last of all, and is seen only with an effort; and, when seen, is
also inferred to be the universal author of all things beautiful
and right, parent of light and of the lord of light in this visible
world, and the immediate source of reason and truth in the in-
tellectual; and that this is the power upon which he who would
act rationally either in public or private life must have his eye
fixed.

  I agree, he said, as far as I am able to understand you.

  Moreover, I said, you must not wonder that those who attain
to this beatific vision are unwilling to descend to human affairs;
for their souls are ever hastening into the upper world where
they desire to dwell; which desire of theirs is very natural, if
our allegory may be trusted.

  Yes, very natural.

  And is there anything surprising in one who passes from
divine contemplations to the evil state of man, misbehaving
himself in a ridiculous manner; if, while his eyes are blinking
and before he has become accustomed to the surrounding dark-
ness, he is compelled to fight in courts of law, or in other places,
about the images or the shadows of images of justice, and is
endeavoring to meet the conceptions of those who have never
yet seen absolute justice?

  Anything but surprising, he replied.
Anyone who has common-sense will remember that the be-
wilderments of the eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two
causes, either from coming out of the light or from going into
the light, which is true of the mind's eye, quite as much as of
the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when he sees anyone
whose vision is perplexed and weak, will not be too ready to
laugh; he will first ask whether that soul of man has come out
of the brighter life, and is unable to see because unaccustomed
to the dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is daz-
zled by excess of light. And he will count the one happy in his
condition and state of being, and he will pity the other; or, if
he have a mind to laugh at the soul which comes from below
into the light, there will be more reason in this than in the laugh
which greets him who returns from above out of the light into
the den.

  That, he said, is a very just distinction.

  But then, if I am right, certain professors of education must
be wrong when they say that they can put a knowledge into the
soul which was not there before, like sight into blind eyes.

  They undoubtedly say this, he replied.

  Whereas, our argument shows that the power and capacity
of learning exists in the soul already; and that just as the eye
was unable to turn from darkness to light without the whole
body, so too the instrument of knowledge can only by the move-
ment of the whole soul be turned from the world of becoming
into that of being, and learn by degrees to endure the sight of
being, and of the brightest and best of being, or, in other words,
of the good.

  Very true.

  And must there not be some art which will effect conversion
in the easiest and quickest manner; not implanting the faculty
of sight, for that exists already, but has been turned in the
wrong direction, and is looking away from the truth?

  Yes, he said, such an art may be presumed.

  And whereas the other so-called virtues of the soul seem to
be akin to bodily qualities, for even when they are not originally
innate they can be implanted later by habit and exercise, the
virtue of wisdom more than anything else contains a divine ele-
ment which always remains, and by this conversion is rendered
useful and profitable; or, on the other hand, hurtful and useless.
Did you never observe the narrow intelligence flashing from the
keen eye of a clever rogue--how eager he is, how clearly his
paltry soul sees the way to his end; he is the reverse of blind,
but his keen eyesight is forced into the service of evil, and he
is mischievous in proportion to his cleverness?

  Very true, he said.

  But what if there had been a circumcision of such natures
in the days of their youth; and they had been severed from
those sensual pleasures, such as eating and drinking, which, like
leaden weights, were attached to them at their birth, and which
drag them down and turn the vision of their souls upon the
things that are below--if, I say, they had been released from
these impediments and turned in the opposite direction, the very
same faculty in them would have seen the truth as keenly as
they see what their eyes are turned to now.

  Very likely.

  Yes, I said; and there is another thing which is likely, or
rather a necessary inference from what has preceded, that
neither the uneducated and uninformed of the truth, nor yet
those who never make an end of their education, will be able
ministers of the State; not the former, because they have no
single aim of duty which is the rule of all their actions, private
as well as public; nor the latter, because they will not act
at all except upon compulsion, fancying that they are already
dwelling apart in the islands of the blessed.

  Very true, he replied.

  Then, I said, the business of us who are the founders of the
State will be to compel the best minds to attain that knowledge
which we have already shown to be the greatest of all--they
must continue to ascend until they arrive at the good; but when
they have ascended and seen enough we must not allow them
to do as they do now.

  What do you mean?

  I mean that they remain in the upper world: but this must
not be allowed; they must be made to descend again among
the prisoners in the den, and partake of their labors and honors,
whether they are worth having or not.

  But is not this unjust? he said; ought we to give them a worse
life, when they might have a better?

  You have again forgotten, my friend, I said, the intention
of the legislator, who did not aim at making any one class in
the State happy above the rest; the happiness was to be in the
whole State, and he held the citizens together by persuasion
and necessity, making them benefactors of the State, and there-
fore benefactors of one another; to this end he created them,
not to please themselves, but to be his instruments in binding
up the State.

  True, he said, I had forgotten.

  Observe, Glaucon, that there will be no injustice in compel-
ling our philosophers to have a care and providence of others;
we shall explain to them that in other States, men of their
class are not obliged to share in the toils of politics: and this is
reasonable, for they grow up at their own sweet will, and the
government would rather not have them. Being self-taught,
they cannot be expected to show any gratitude for a culture
which they have never received. But we have brought you
into the world to be rulers of the hive, kings of yourselves and
of the other citizens, and have educated you far better and more
perfectly than they have been educated, and you are better able
to share in the double duty. Wherefore each of you, when his
turn comes, must go down to the general underground abode,
and get the habit of seeing in the dark. When you have ac-
quired the habit, you will see ten thousand times better than the
inhabitants of the den, and you will know what the several
images are, and what they represent, because you have seen the
beautiful and just and good in their truth. And thus our State,
which is also yours, will be a reality, and not a dream only, and
will be administered in a spirit unlike that of other States, in
which men fight with one another about shadows only and are
distracted in the struggle for power, which in their eyes is a
great good. Whereas the truth is that the State in which the
rulers are most reluctant to govern is always the best and most
quietly governed, and the State in which they are most eager,
the worst.

  Quite true, he replied.

  And will our pupils, when they hear this, refuse to take their
turn at the toils of State, when they are allowed to spend the
greater part of their time with one another in the heavenly
light?

  Impossible, he answered; for they are just men, and the com-
mands which we impose upon them are just; there can be no
doubt that every one of them will take office as a stern necessity,
and not after the fashion of our present rulers of State.

  Yes, my friend, I said; and there lies the point. You must
contrive for your future rulers another and a better life than
that of a ruler, and then you may have a well-ordered State;
for only in the State which offers this, will they rule who are
truly rich, not in silver and gold, but in virtue and wisdom,
which are the true blessings of life. Whereas, if they go to the
administration of public affairs, poor and hungering after their
own private advantage, thinking that hence they are to snatch
the chief good, order there can never be; for they will be fight-
ing about office, and the civil and domestic broils which thus
arise will be the ruin of the rulers themselves and of the whole
State.

  Most true, he replied.

  And the only life which looks down upon the life of political
ambition is that of true philosophy. Do you know of any
other?

  Indeed, I do not, he said.

  And those who govern ought not to be lovers of the task?
For, if they are, there will be rival lovers, and they will fight.

  No question.
Who, then, are those whom we shall compel to be guardians?
Surely they will be the men who are wisest about affairs of
State, and by whom the State is best administered, and who at
the same time have other honors and another and a better life
than that of politics?

  They are the men, and I will choose them, he replied.

  And now shall we consider in what way such guardians will
be produced, and how they are to be brought from darkness to
light--as some are said to have ascended from the world below
to the gods?

  By all means, he replied.

  The process, I said, is not the turning over of an oyster-
shell, but the turning round of a soul passing from a day which
is little better than night to the true day of being, that is, the
ascent from below, which we affirm to be true philosophy?

  Quite so.

  And should we not inquire what sort of knowledge has the
power of effecting such a change?

  Certainly.

  What sort of knowledge is there which would draw the soul
from becoming to being? And another consideration has just
occurred to me: You will remember that our young men are
to be warrior athletes?

  Yes, that was said.

  Then this new kind of knowledge must have an additional
quality?

  What quality?

  Usefulness in war.

  Yes, if possible.

  There were two parts in our former scheme of education,
were there not?

  Just so.

  There was gymnastics, which presided over the growth and
decay of the body, and may therefore be regarded as having
to do with generation and corruption?

  True.

  Then that is not the knowledge which we are seeking to dis-
cover?
No.

  But what do you say of music, what also entered to a certain
extent into our former scheme?

  Music, he said, as you will remember, was the counterpart
of gymnastics, and trained the guardians by the influences of
habit, by harmony making them harmonious, by rhythm rhyth-
mical, but not giving them science; and the words, whether
fabulous or possibly true, had kindred elements of rhythm and
harmony in them. But in music there was nothing which tend-
ed to that good which you are now seeking.

  You are most accurate, I said, in your recollection; in music
there certainly was nothing of the kind. But what branch of
knowledge is there, my dear Glaucon, which is of the desired
nature; since all the useful arts were reckoned mean by us?

  Undoubtedly; and yet if music and gymnastics are excluded,
and the arts are also excluded, what remains?

  Well, I said, there may be nothing left of our special sub-
jects; and then we shall have to take something which is not
special, but of the universal application.

  What may that be?

  A something which all arts and sciences and intelligences
use in common, and which everyone first has to learn among
the elements of education.

  What is that?

  The little matter of distinguishing one, two, and three--in
a word, number and calculation: do not all arts and sciences
necessarily partake of them?

  Yes.

  Then the art of war partakes of them?

  To be sure.

  Then Palamedes, whenever he appears in tragedy, proves
Agamemnon ridiculously unfit to be a general. Did you never
remark how he declares that he had invented number, and had
numbered the ships and set in array the ranks of the army at
Troy; which implies that they had never been numbered before,
and Agamemnon must be supposed literally to have been in-
capable of counting his own fleet--how could he if he was ig-
norant of number? And if that is true, what sort of general
must he have been?

  I should say a very strange one, if this was as you say.

  Can we deny that a warrior should have a knowledge of
arithmetic?

  Certainly he should, if he is to have the smallest understand-
ing of military tactics, or indeed, I should rather say, if he is to
be a man at all.

  I should like to know whether you have the same notion
which I have of this study?

  What is your notion?

  It appears to me to be a study of the kind which we are seek-
ing, and which leads naturally to reflection, but never to have
been rightly used; for the true use of it is simply to draw the
soul toward being.

  Will you explain your meaning? he said.

  I will try, I said; and I wish you would share the inquiry
with me, and say "yes" or "no" when I attempt to distinguish
in my own mind what branches of knowledge have this attract-
ing power, in order that we may have clearer proof that arith-
metic is, as I suspect, one of them.

  Explain, he said.

  I mean to say that objects of sense are of two kinds; some
of them do not invite thought because the sense is an adequate
judge of them; while in the case of other objects sense is so un-
trustworthy that further inquiry is imperatively demanded.

  You are clearly referring, he said, to the manner in which
the senses are imposed upon by distance, and by painting in
light and shade.

  No, I said, that is not at all my meaning.

  Then what is your meaning?

  When speaking of uninviting objects, I mean those which do
not pass from one sensation to the opposite; inviting objects
are those which do; in this latter case the sense coming upon
the object, whether at a distance or near, gives no more vivid
idea of anything in particular than of its opposite. An illus-
tration will make my meaning clearer: here are three fingers--
a little finger, a second finger, and a middle finger.

  Very good.

  You may suppose that they are seen quite close: And here
comes the point.

  What is it?

  Each of them equally appears a finger, whether seen in the
middle or at the extremity, whether white or black, or thick
or thin--it makes no difference; a finger is a finger all the
same. In these cases a man is not compelled to ask of thought
the question, What is a finger? for the sight never intimates to
the mind that a finger is other than a finger.

  True.

  And therefore, I said, as we might expect, there is nothing
here which invites or excites intelligence.

  There is not, he said.

  But is this equally true of the greatness and smallness of the
fingers? Can sight adequately perceive them? and is no differ-
ence made by the circumstance that one of the fingers is in the
middle and the other at the extremity? And in like manner
does the touch adequately perceive the qualities of thickness or
thinness, of softness or hardness? And so of the other senses;
do they give perfect intimations of such matters? Is not their
mode of operation on this wise--the sense which is concerned
with the quality of hardness is necessarily concerned also with
the quality of softness, and only intimates to the soul that the
same thing is felt to be both hard and soft?

  You are quite right, he said.

  And must not the soul be perplexed at this intimation which
the sense gives of a hard which is also soft? What, again, is
the meaning of light and heavy, if that which is light is also
heavy, and that which is heavy, light?

  Yes, he said, these intimations which the soul receives are
very curious and require to be explained.

  Yes, I said, and in these perplexities the soul naturally sum-
mons to her aid calculation and intelligence, that she may see
whether the several objects announced to her are one or two.

  True.

  And if they turn out to be two, is not each of them one and
different?

  Certainly.

  And if each is one, and both are two, she will conceive the
two as in a state of division, for if they were undivided they
could only be conceived of as one?

  True.

  The eye certainly did see both small and great, but only in
a confused manner; they were not distinguished.

  Yes.

  Whereas the thinking mind, intending to light up the chaos,
was compelled to reverse the process, and look at small and
great as separate and not confused.

  Very true.

  Was not this the beginning of the inquiry, "What is great?"
and "What is small?"

  Exactly so.

  And thus arose the distinction of the visible and the intel-
ligible.

  Most true.

  This was what I meant when I spoke of impressions which
invited the intellect, or the reverse--those which are simul-
taneous with opposite impressions, invite thought; those which
are not simultaneous do not.

  I understand, he said, and agree with you.

  And to which class do unity and number belong?

  I do not know, he replied.

  Think a little and you will see that what has preceded will
supply the answer; for if simple unity could be adequately per-
ceived by the sight or by any other sense, then, as we were say-
ing in the case of the finger, there would be nothing to attract
toward being; but when there is some contradiction always
present, and one is the reverse of one and involves the concep-
tion of plurality, then thought begins to be aroused within us,
and the soul perplexed and wanting to arrive at a decision asks,
"What is absolute unity?" This is the way in which the study
of the one has a power of drawing and converting the mind
to the contemplation of true being.

  And surely, he said, this occurs notably in the case of one;
for we see the same thing to be both one and infinite in multi-
tude?

  Yes, I said; and this being true of one must be equally true
of all number?

  Certainly.

  And all arithmetic and calculation have to do with number?

  Yes.

  And they appear to lead the mind toward truth?

  Yes, in a very remarkable manner.

  Then this is knowledge of the kind for which we are seeking,
having a double use, military and philosophical; for the man of
war must learn the art of number or he will not know how to
array his troops, and the philosopher also, because he has to
rise out of the sea of change and lay hold of true being, and
therefore he must be an arithmetician.

  That is true.

  And our guardian is both warrior and philosopher?

  Certainly.

  Then this is a kind of knowledge which legislation may fitly
prescribe; and we must endeavor to persuade those who are to
be the principal men of our State to go and learn arithmetic,
not as amateurs, but they must carry on the study until they see
the nature of numbers with the mind only; nor again, like mer-
chants or retail-traders, with a view to buying or selling, but
for the sake of their military use, and of the soul herself; and
because this will be the easiest way for her to pass from becom-
ing to truth and being.

  That is excellent, he said.

  Yes, I said, and now having spoken of it, I must add how
charming the science is! and in how many ways it conduces to
our desired end, if pursued in the spirit of a philosopher, and
not of a shopkeeper!

  How do you mean?

  I mean, as I was saying, that arithmetic has a very great and
elevating effect, compelling the soul to reason about abstract
number, and rebelling against the introduction of visible or
tangible objects into the argument. You know how steadily
the masters of the art repel and ridicule anyone who attempts
to divide absolute unity when he is calculating, and if you
divide, they multiply, taking care that one shall continue one
and not become lost in fractions.

  That is very true.

  Now, suppose a person were to say to them: O my friends,
what are these wonderful numbers about which you are rea-
soning, in which, as you say, there is a unity such as you de-
mand, and each unit is equal, invariable, indivisible--what
would they answer?

  They would answer, as I should conceive, that they were
speaking of those numbers which can only be realized in
thought.

  Then you see that this knowledge may be truly called neces-
sary, necessitating as it clearly does the use of the pure intelli-
gence in the attainment of pure truth?

  Yes; that is a marked characteristic of it.

  And have you further observed that those who have a natural
talent for calculation are generally quick at every other kind of
knowledge; and even the dull, if they have had an arithmetical
training, although they may derive no other advantage from it,
always become much quicker than they would otherwise have
been?

  Very true, he said.

  And indeed, you will not easily find a more difficult study,
and not many as difficult.

  You will not.

  And, for all these reasons, arithmetic is a kind of knowledge
in which the best natures should be trained, and which must
not be given up.

  I agree.

  Let this then be made one of our subjects of education. And
next, shall we inquire whether the kindred science also con-
cerns us?

  You mean geometry?

  Exactly so.

  Clearly, he said, we are concerned with that part of geometry
which relates to war; for in pitching a camp or taking up a
position or closing or extending the lines of an army, or any
other military manoeuvre, whether in actual battle or on a
march, it will make all the difference whether a general is or is
not a geometrician.

  Yes, I said, but for that purpose a very little of either geome-
try or calculation will be enough; the question relates rather
to the greater and more advanced part of geometry--whether
that tends in any degree to make more easy the vision of the
idea of good; and thither, as I was saying, all things tend which
compel the soul to turn her gaze toward that place, where is
the full perfection of being, which she ought, by all means, to
behold.

  True, he said.

  Then if geometry compels us to view being, it concerns us;
if becoming only, it does not concern us?

  Yes, that is what we assert.

  Yet anybody who has the least acquaintance with geometry
will not deny that such a conception of the science is in flat con-
tradiction to the ordinary language of geometricians.

  How so?

  They have in view practice only, and are always speaking,
in a narrow and ridiculous manner, of squaring and extending
and applying and the like--they confuse the necessities of ge-
ometry with those of daily life; whereas knowledge is the real
object of the whole science.

  Certainly, he said.

  Then must not a further admission be made?

  What admission?

  That the knowledge at which geometry aims is knowledge
of the eternal, and not of aught perishing and transient.

  That, he replied, may be readily allowed, and is true.

  Then, my noble friend, geometry will draw the soul toward
truth, and create the spirit of philosophy, and raise up that
which is now unhappily allowed to fall down.

  Nothing will be more likely to have such an effect.

  Then nothing should be more sternly laid down than that the
inhabitants of your fair city should by all means learn geometry.
Moreover, the science has indirect effects, which are not small.

  Of what kind? he said.

  There are the military advantages of which you spoke, I said;
and in all departments of knowledge, as experience proves, any-
one who has studied geometry is infinitely quicker of apprehen-
sion than one who has not.
Yes, indeed, he said, there is an infinite difference between
them.

  Then shall we propose this as a second branch of knowledge
which our youth will study?

  Let us do so, he replied.

  And suppose we make astronomy the third--what do you
say?

  I am strongly inclined to it, he said; the observation of the
seasons and of months and years is as essential to the general
as it is to the farmer or sailor.

  I am amused, I said, at your fear of the world, which makes
you guard against the appearance of insisting upon useless
studies; and I quite admit the difficulty of believing that in
every man there is an eye of the soul which, when by other pur-
suits lost and dimmed, is by these purified and reillumined; and
is more precious far than ten thousand bodily eyes, for by it
alone is truth seen. Now there are two classes of persons:
one class of those who will agree with you and will take your
words as a revelation; another class to whom they will be ut-
terly unmeaning, and who will naturally deem them to be idle
tales, for they see no sort of profit which is to be obtained from
them. And therefore you had better decide at once with which
of the two you are proposing to argue. You will very likely
say with neither, and that your chief aim in carrying on the
argument is your own improvement; at the same time you do
not grudge to others any benefit which they may receive.

  I think that I should prefer to carry on the argument mainly
on my own behalf.

  Then take a step backward, for we have gone wrong in the
order of the sciences.

  What was the mistake? he said.

  After plane geometry, I said, we proceeded at once to solids
in revolution, instead of taking solids in themselves; whereas
after the second dimension, the third, which is concerned with
cubes and dimensions of depth, ought to have followed.

  That is true, Socrates; but so little seems to be known as yet
about these subjects.

  Why, yes, I said, and for two reasons: in the first place, no
government patronizes them; this leads to a want of energy in
the pursuit of them, and they are difficult; in the second place,
students cannot learn them unless they have a director. But
then a director can hardly be found, and, even if he could, as
matters now stand, the students, who are very conceited, would
not attend to him. That, however, would be otherwise if the
whole State became the director of these studies and gave honor
to them; then disciples would want to come, and there would be
continuous and earnest search, and discoveries would be made;
since even now, disregarded as they are by the world, and
maimed of their fair proportions, and although none of their
votaries can tell the use of them, still these studies force their
way by their natural charm, and very likely, if they had the help
of the State, they would some day emerge into light.

  Yes, he said, there is a remarkable charm in them. But I do
not clearly understand the change in the order. First you be-
gan with a geometry of plane surfaces?

  Yes, I said.

  And you placed astronomy next, and then you made a step
backward?

  Yes, and I have delayed you by my hurry; the ludicrous state
of solid geometry, which, in natural order, should have fol-
lowed, made me pass over this branch and go on to astronomy,
or motion of solids.

  True, he said.

  Then assuming that the science now omitted would come into
existence if encouraged by the State, let us go on to astronomy,
which will be fourth.

  The right order, he replied. And now, Socrates, as you re-
buked the vulgar manner in which I praised astronomy before,
my praise shall be given in your own spirit. For everyone, as
I think, must see that astronomy compels the soul to look up-
ward and leads us from this world to another.
Everyone but myself, I said; to everyone else this may be
clear, but not to me.

  And what, then, would you say?

  I should rather say that those who elevate astronomy into
philosophy appear to me to make us look downward, and not
upward.

  What do you mean? he asked.

  You, I replied, have in your mind a truly sublime conception
of our knowledge of the things above. And I dare say that if
a person were to throw his head back and study the fretted ceil-
ing, you would still think that his mind was the percipient, and
not his eyes. And you are very likely right, and I may be a
simpleton: but, in my opinion, that knowledge only which is
of being and of the unseen can make the soul look upward, and
whether a man gapes at the heavens or blinks on the ground,
seeking to learn some particular of sense, I would deny that he
can learn, for nothing of that sort is matter of science; his soul
is looking downward, not upward, whether his way to knowl-
edge is by water or by land, whether he floats or only lies on his
back.

  I acknowledge, he said, the justice of your rebuke. Still, I
should like to ascertain how astronomy can be learned in any
manner more conducive to that knowledge of which we are
speaking?

  I will tell you, I said: The starry heaven which we behold
is wrought upon a visible ground, and therefore, although the
fairest and most perfect of visible things, must necessarily be
deemed inferior far to the true motions of absolute swiftness
and absolute slowness, which are relative to each other, and
carry with them that which is contained in them, in the true
number and in every true figure. Now, these are to be appre-
hended by reason and intelligence, but not by sight.

  True, he replied.

  The spangled heavens should be used as a pattern and with
a view to that higher knowledge; their beauty is like the beauty
of figures or pictures excellently wrought by the hand of Dae-
dalus, or some other great artist, which we may chance to be-
hold; any geometrician who saw them would appreciate the ex-
quisiteness of their workmanship, but he would never dream of
thinking that in them he could find the true equal or the true
double, or the truth of any other proportion.

  No, he replied, such an idea would be ridiculous.

  And will not a true astronomer have the same feeling when
he looks at the movements of the stars? Will he not think
that heaven and the things in heaven are framed by the Creator
of them in the most perfect manner? But he will never imag-
ine that the proportions of night and day, or of both to the
month, or of the month to the year, or of the stars to these and
to one another, and any other things that are material and visi-
ble can also be eternal and subject to no deviation--that would
be absurd; and it is equally absurd to take so much pains in
investigating their exact truth.

  I quite agree, though I never thought of this before.

  Then, I said, in astronomy, as in geometry, we should em-
ploy problems, and let the heavens alone if we would approach
the subject in the right way and so make the natural gift of
reason to be of any real use.

  That, he said, is a work infinitely beyond our present astron-
omers.

  Yes, I said; and there are many other things which must also
have a similar extension given to them, if our legislation is to
be of any value. But can you tell me of any other suitable
study?

  No, he said, not without thinking.

  Motion, I said, has many forms, and not one only; two of
them are obvious enough even to wits no better than ours; and
there are others, as I imagine, which may be left to wiser per-
sons.

  But where are the two?

  There is a second, I said, which is the counterpart of the one
already named.

  And what may that be?

  The second, I said, would seem relatively to the ears to be
what the first is to the eyes; for I conceive that as the eyes are
designed to look up at the stars, so are the ears to hear harmo-
nious motions; and these are sister sciences--as the Pythago-
reans say, and we, Glaucon, agree with them?

  Yes, he replied.

  But this, I said, is a laborious study, and therefore we had
better go and learn of them; and they will tell us whether there
are any other applications of these sciences. At the same time,
we must not lose sight of our own higher object.

  What is that?

  There is a perfection which all knowledge ought to reach,
and which our pupils ought also to attain, and not to fall short
of, as I was saying that they did in astronomy. For in the
science of harmony, as you probably know, the same thing hap-
pens. The teachers of harmony compare the sounds and con-
sonances which are heard only, and their labor, like that of the
astronomers, is in vain.

  Yes, by heaven! he said; and 'tis as good as a play to hear
them talking about their condensed notes, as they call them;
they put their ears close alongside of the strings like persons
catching a sound from their neighbor's wall--one set of them
declaring that they distinguish an intermediate note and have
found the least interval which should be the unit of measure-
ment; the others insisting that the two sounds have passed into
the same--either party setting their ears before their under-
standing.

  You mean, I said, those gentlemen who tease and torture the
strings and rack them on the pegs of the instrument: I might
carry on the metaphor and speak after their manner of the
blows which the plectrum gives, and make accusations against
the strings, both of backwardness and forwardness to sound;
but this would be tedious, and therefore I will only say that
these are not the men, and that I am referring to the Pytha-
goreans, of whom I was just now proposing to inquire about
harmony. For they too are in error, like the astronomers; they
investigate the numbers of the harmonies which are heard, but
they never attain to problems--that is to say, they never reach
the natural harmonies of number, or reflect why some numbers
are harmonious and others not.

  That, he said, is a thing of more than mortal knowledge.

  A thing, I replied, which I would rather call useful; that is,
if sought after with a view to the beautiful and good; but if
pursued in any other spirit, useless.
Very true, he said.

  Now, when all these studies reach the point of intercommun-
ion and connection with one another, and come to be considered
in their mutual affinities, then, I think, but not till then, will the
pursuit of them have a value for our objects; otherwise there
is no profit in them.

  I suspect so; but you are speaking, Socrates, of a vast work.

  What do you mean? I said; the prelude, or what? Do you
not know that all this is but the prelude to the actual strain
which we have to learn? For you surely would not regard
the skilled mathematician as a dialectician?

  Assuredly not, he said; I have hardly ever known a mathe-
matician who was capable of reasoning.

  But do you imagine that men who are unable to give and
take a reason will have the knowledge which we require of
them?

  Neither can this be supposed.

  And so, Glaucon, I said, we have at last arrived at the hymn
of dialectic. This is that strain which is of the intellect only,
but which the faculty of sight will nevertheless be found to im-
itate; for sight, as you may remember, was imagined by us
after a while to behold the real animals and stars, and last of all
the sun himself. And so with dialectic; when a person starts
on the discovery of the absolute by the light of reason only, and
without any assistance of sense, and perseveres until by pure
intelligence he arrives at the perception of the absolute good,
he at last finds himself at the end of the intellectual world, as
in the case of sight at the end of the visible.

  Exactly, he said.

  Then this is the progress which you call dialectic?

  True.

  But the release of the prisoners from chains, and their trans-
lation from the shadows to the images and to the light, and the
ascent from the underground den to the sun, while in his pres-
ence they are vainly trying to look on animals and plants and
the light of the sun, but are able to perceive even with their
weak eyes the images in the water (which are divine), and
are the shadows of true existence (not shadows of images cast
by a light of fire, which compared with the sun is only an
image)--this power of elevating the highest principle in the
soul to the contemplation of that which is best in existence,
with which we may compare the raising of that faculty which
is the very light of the body to the sight of that which is bright-
est in the material and visible world--this power is given, as
I was saying, by all that study and pursuit of the arts which
have been described.

  I agree in what you are saying, he replied, which may be
hard to believe, yet, from another point of view, is harder still
to deny. This, however, is not a theme to be treated of in pass-
ing only, but will have to be discussed again and again. And
so, whether our conclusion be true or false, let us assume all
this, and proceed at once from the prelude or preamble to the
chief strain, and describe that in like manner. Say, then, what
is the nature and what are the divisions of dialectic, and what
are the paths which lead thither; for these paths will also lead
to our final rest.

  Dear Glaucon, I said, you will not be able to follow me here,
though I would do my best, and you should behold not an image
only, but the absolute truth, according to my notion. Whether
what I told you would or would not have been a reality I cannot
venture to say; but you would have seen something like reality;
of that I am confident.

  Doubtless, he replied.

  But I must also remind you that the power of dialectic alone
can reveal this, and only to one who is a disciple of the previous
sciences.

  Of that assertion you may be as confident as of the last.

  And assuredly no one will argue that there is any other
method of comprehending by any regular process all true ex-
istence, or of ascertaining what each thing is in its own nature;
for the arts in general are concerned with the desires or opin-
ions of men, or are cultivated with a view to production and
construction, or for the preservation of such productions and
constructions; and as to the mathematical sciences which, as
we were saying, have some apprehension of true being--geom-
etry and the like--they only dream about being, but never can
they behold the waking reality so long as they leave the hy-
potheses which they use unexamined, and are unable to give an
account of them. For when a man knows not his own first
principle, and when the conclusion and intermediate steps are
also constructed out of he knows not what, how can he imagine
that such a fabric of convention can ever become science?

  Impossible, he said.

  Then dialectic, and dialectic alone, goes directly to the first
principle and is the only science which does away with hy-
potheses in order to make her ground secure; the eye of the
soul, which is literally buried in an outlandish slough, is by her
gentle aid lifted upward; and she uses as handmaids and
helpers in the work of conversion, the sciences which we have
been discussing. Custom terms them sciences, but they ought
to have some other name, implying greater clearness than opin-
ion and less clearness than science: and this, in our previous
sketch, was called understanding. But why should we dispute
about names when we have realities of such importance to con-
sider?
Why, indeed, he said, when any name will do which ex-
presses the thought of the mind with clearness?

  At any rate, we are satisfied, as before, to have four divisions;
two for intellect and two for opinion, and to call the first divis-
ion science, the second understanding, the third belief, and the
fourth perception of shadows, opinion being concerned with
becoming, and intellect with being; and so to make a propor-
tion:

  "As being is to becoming, so is pure intellect to opinion.
   And as intellect is to opinion, so is science to belief, and understand-
   ing to the perception of shadows."

But let us defer the further correlation and subdivision of the
subjects of opinion and of intellect, for it will be a long inquiry,
many times longer than this has been.

  As far as I understand, he said, I agree.

  And do you also agree, I said, in describing the dialectician
as one who attains a conception of the essence of each thing?
And he who does not possess and is therefore unable to impart
this conception, in whatever degree he fails, may in that degree
also be said to fail in intelligence? Will you admit so much?

  Yes, he said; how can I deny it?

  And you would say the same of the conception of the good?

  Until the person is able to abstract and define rationally the
idea of good, and unless he can run the gauntlet of all objec-
tions, and is ready to disprove them, not by appeals to opinion,
but to absolute truth, never faltering at any step of the argu-
ment--unless he can do all this, you would say that he knows
neither the idea of good nor any other good; he apprehends
only a shadow, if anything at all, which is given by opinion,
and not by science; dreaming and slumbering in this life, before
he is well awake here, he arrives at the world below, and has
his final quietus.

  In all that I should most certainly agree with you.

  And surely you would not have the children of your ideal
State, whom you are nurturing and educating--if the ideal
ever becomes a reality--you would not allow the future rulers
to be like posts, having no reason in them, and yet to be set in
authority over the highest matters?

  Certainly not.

  Then you will make a law that they shall have such an edu-
cation as will enable them to attain the greatest skill in asking
and answering questions?

  Yes, he said, you and I together will make it.

  Dialectic, then, as you will agree, is the coping-stone of the
sciences, and is set over them; no other science can be placed
higher--the nature of knowledge can no further go?

  I agree, he said.

  But to whom we are to assign these studies, and in what way
they are to be assigned, are questions which remain to be con-
sidered.

  Yes, clearly.

  You remember, I said, how the rulers were chosen before?

  Certainly, he said.

  The same natures must still be chosen, and the preference
again given to the surest and the bravest, and, if possible, to the
fairest; and, having noble and generous tempers, they should
also have the natural gifts which will facilitate their education.

  And what are these?

  Such gifts as keenness and ready powers of acquisition; for
the mind more often faints from the severity of study than
from the severity of gymnastics: the toil is more entirely the
mind's own, and is not shared with the body.

  Very true, he replied.

  Further, he of whom we are in search should have a good
memory, and be an unwearied solid man who is a lover of labor
in any line; or he will never be able to endure the great amount
of bodily exercise and to go through all the intellectual disci-
pline and study which we require of him.

  Certainly, he said; he must have natural gifts.

  The mistake at present is that those who study philosophy
have no vocation, and this, as I was before saying, is the reason
why she has fallen into disrepute: her true sons should take
her by the hand, and not bastards.

  What do you mean?

  In the first place, her votary should not have a lame or halt-
ing industry--I mean, that he should not be half industrious
and half idle: as, for example, when a man is a lover of gym-
nastics and hunting, and all other bodily exercises, but a hater
rather than a lover of the labor of learning or listening or in-
quiring. Or the occupation to which he devotes himself may
be of an opposite kind, and he may have the other sort of lame-
ness.

  Certainly, he said.

  And as to truth, I said, is not a soul equally to be deemed
halt and lame which hates voluntary falsehood and is extremely
indignant at herself and others when they tell lies, but is patient
of involuntary falsehood, and does not mind wallowing like a
swinish beast in the mire of ignorance, and has no shame at
being detected?

  To be sure.

  And, again, in respect of temperance, courage, magnificence,
and every other virtue, should we not carefully distinguish be-
tween the true son and the bastard? for where there is no dis-
cernment of such qualities, States and individuals uncon-
sciously err; and the State makes a ruler, and the individual a
friend, of one who, being defective in some part of virtue,
is in a figure lame or a bastard.

  That is very true, he said.

  All these things, then, will have to be carefully considered
by us; and if only those whom we introduce to this vast system
of education and training are sound in body and mind, justice
herself will have nothing to say against us, and we shall be the
saviours of the constitution and of the State; but, if our pupils
are men of another stamp, the reverse will happen, and we
shall pour a still greater flood of ridicule on philosophy than
she has to endure at present.

  That would not be creditable.

  Certainly not, I said; and yet perhaps, in thus turning jest
into earnest I am equally ridiculous.

  In what respect?

  I had forgotten, I said, that we were not serious, and spoke
with too much excitement. For when I saw philosophy so
undeservedly trampled under foot of men I could not help feel-
ing a sort of indignation at the authors of her disgrace: and my
anger made me too vehement.

  Indeed! I was listening, and did not think so.

  But I, who am the speaker, felt that I was. And now let
me remind you that, although in our former selection we chose
old men, we must not do so in this. Solon was under a delu-
sion when he said that a man when he grows old may learn
many things--for he can no more learn much than he can run
much; youth is the time for any extraordinary toil.

  Of course.

  And, therefore, calculation and geometry and all the other
elements of instruction, which are a preparation for dialectic,
should be presented to the mind in childhood; not, however,
under any notion of forcing our system of education.

  Why not?

  Because a freeman ought not to be a slave in the acquisition
of knowledge of any kind. Bodily exercise, when compulsory,
does no harm to the body; but knowledge which is acquired
under compulsion obtains no hold on the mind.

  Very true.

  Then, my good friend, I said, do not use compulsion, but
let early education be a sort of amusement; you will then be
better able to find out the natural bent.

  That is a very rational notion, he said.

  Do you remember that the children, too, were to be taken
to see the battle on horseback; and that if there were no danger
they were to be brought close up and, like young hounds, have
a taste of blood given them?

  Yes, I remember.

  The same practice may be followed, I said, in all these things
--labors, lessons, dangers--and he who is most at home in all
of them ought to be enrolled in a select number.

  At what age?

  At the age when the necessary gymnastics are over: the
period, whether of two or three years, which passes in this sort
of training is useless for any other purpose; for sleep and ex-
ercise are unpropitious to learning; and the trial of who is first
in gymnastic exercises is one of the most important tests to
which our youth are subjected.

  Certainly, he replied.

  After that time those who are selected from the class of
twenty years old will be promoted to higher honor, and the
sciences which they learned without any order in their early
education will now be brought together, and they will be able
to see the natural relationship of them to one another and to
true being.

  Yes, he said, that is the only kind of knowledge which takes
lasting root.

  Yes, I said; and the capacity for such knowledge is the great
criterion of dialectical talent: the comprehensive mind is always
the dialectical.

  I agree with you, he said.

  These, I said, are the points which you must consider; and
those who have most of this comprehension, and who are most
steadfast in their learning, and in their military and other ap-
pointed duties, when they have arrived at the age of thirty will
have to be chosen by you out of the select class, and elevated
to higher honor; and you will have to prove them by the help
of dialectic, in order to learn which of them is able to give up
the use of sight and the other senses, and in company with truth
to attain absolute being: And here, my friend, great caution is
required.

  Why great caution?

  Do you not remark, I said, how great is the evil which dia-
lectic has introduced?

  What evil? he said.

  The students of the art are filled with lawlessness.

  Quite true, he said.

  Do you think that there is anything so very unnatural or in-
excusable in their case? or will you make allowance for them?

  In what way make allowance?

  I want you, I said, by way of parallel, to imagine a suppo-
sititious son who is brought up in great wealth; he is one of a
great and numerous family, and has many flatterers. When
he grows up to manhood, he learns that his alleged are not his
real parents; but who the real are he is unable to discover. Can
you guess how he will be likely to behave toward his flatterers
and his supposed parents, first of all during the period when he
is ignorant of the false relation, and then again when he knows?
Or shall I guess for you?

  If you please.

  Then I should say that while he is ignorant of the truth he
will be likely to honor his father and his mother and his sup-
posed relations more than the flatterers; he will be less inclined
to neglect them when in need, or to do or say anything against
them; and he will be less willing to disobey them in any im-
portant matter.

  He will.

  But when he has made the discovery, I should imagine that
he would diminish his honor and regard for them, and would
become more devoted to the flatterers; their influence over him
would greatly increase; he would now live after their ways, and
openly associate with them, and, unless he were of an unusually
good disposition, he would trouble himself no more about his
supposed parents or other relations.

  Well, all that is very probable. But how is the image appli-
cable to the disciples of philosophy?

  In this way: you know that there are certain principles about
justice and honor, which were taught us in childhood, and
under their parental authority we have been brought up, obey-
ing and honoring them.

  That is true.

  There are also opposite maxims and habits of pleasure which
flatter and attract the soul, but do not influence those of us
who have any sense of right, and they continue to obey and
honor the maxims of their fathers.

  True.

  Now, when a man is in this state, and the questioning spirit
asks what is fair or honorable, and he answers as the legislator
has taught him, and then arguments many and diverse refute
his words, until he is driven into believing that nothing is
honorable any more than dishonorable, or just and good any
more than the reverse, and so of all the notions which he most
valued, do you think that he will still honor and obey them as
before?

  Impossible.

  And when he ceases to think them honorable and natural
as heretofore, and he fails to discover the true, can he be ex-
pected to pursue any life other than that which flatters his
desires?

  He cannot.

  And from being a keeper of the law he is converted into a
breaker of it?

  Unquestionably.

  Now all this is very natural in students of philosophy such
as I have described, and also, as I was just now saying, most
excusable.

  Yes, he said; and, I may add, pitiable.

  Therefore, that your feelings may not be moved to pity about
our citizens who are now thirty years of age, every care must
be taken in introducing them to dialectic.

  Certainly.

  There is a danger lest they should taste the dear delight too
early; for youngsters, as you may have observed, when they
first get the taste in their mouths, argue for amusement, and
are always contradicting and refuting others in imitation of
those who refute them; like puppy-dogs, they rejoice in pull-
ing and tearing at all who come near them.

  Yes, he said, there is nothing which they like better.

  And when they have made many conquests and received de-
feats at the hands of many, they violently and speedily get into
a way of not believing anything which they believed before,
and hence, not only they, but philosophy and all that relates to
it is apt to have a bad name with the rest of the world.

  Too true, he said.

  But when a man begins to get older, he will no longer be
guilty of such insanity; he will imitate the dialectician who is
seeking for truth, and not the eristic, who is contradicting for
the sake of amusement; and the greater moderation of his char-
acter will increase instead of diminishing the honor of the pur-
suit.

  Very true, he said.

  And did we not make special provision for this, when we
said that the disciples of philosophy were to be orderly and
steadfast, not, as now, any chance aspirant or intruder?

  Very true.

  Suppose, I said, the study of philosophy to take the place of
gymnastics and to be continued diligently and earnestly and
exclusively for twice the number of years which were passed
in bodily exercise--will that be enough?

  Would you say six or four years? he asked.

  Say five years, I replied; at the end of the time they must
be sent down again into the den and compelled to hold any mil-
itary or other office which young men are qualified to hold: in
this way they will get their experience of life, and there will be
an opportunity of trying whether, when they are drawn all
manner of ways by temptation, they will stand firm or flinch.

  And how long is this stage of their lives to last?

  Fifteen years, I answered; and when they have reached fifty
years of age, then let those who still survive and have distin-
guished themselves in every action of their lives, and in every
branch of knowledge, come at last to their consummation: the
time has now arrived at which they must raise the eye of the
soul to the universal light which lightens all things, and behold
the absolute good; for that is the pattern according to which
they are to order the State and the lives of individuals, and the
remainder of their own lives also; making philosophy their
chief pursuit, but, when their turn comes, toiling also at politics
and ruling for the public good, not as though they were per-
forming some heroic action, but simply as a matter of duty;
and when they have brought up in each generation others like
themselves and left them in their place to be governors of the
State, then they will depart to the Islands of the Blessed and
dwell there; and the city will give them public memorials and
sacrifices and honor them, if the Pythian oracle consent, as
demigods, but if not, as in any case blessed and divine.

  You are a sculptor, Socrates, and have made statues of our
governors faultless in beauty.

  Yes, I said, Glaucon, and of our governesses too; for you
must not suppose that what I have been saying applies to men
only and not to women as far as their natures can go.

  There you are right, he said, since we have made them to
share in all things like the men.

  Well, I said, and you would agree (would you not?) that
what has been said about the State and the government is not
a mere dream, and although difficult, not impossible, but only
possible in the way which has been supposed; that is to say,
when the true philosopher-kings are born in a State, one or
more of them, despising the honors of this present world which
they deem mean and worthless, esteeming above all things right
and the honor that springs from right, and regarding justice
as the greatest and most necessary of all things, whose minis-
ters they are, and whose principles will be exalted by them
when they set in order their own city?

  How will they proceed?

  They will begin by sending out into the country all the in-
habitants of the city who are more than ten years old, and will
take possession of their children, who will be unaffected by the
habits of their parents; these they will train in their own habits
and laws, I mean in the laws which we have given them: and in
this way the State and constitution of which we were speaking
will soonest and most easily attain happiness, and the nation
which has such a constitution will gain most.

  Yes, that will be the best way. And I think, Socrates, that
you have very well described how, if ever, such a constitution
might come into being.
Enough, then, of the perfect State, and of the man who bears
its image--there is no difficulty in seeing how we shall describe
him.

  There is no difficulty, he replied; and I agree with you in
thinking that nothing more need be said.


                      BOOK VIII
               FOUR FORMS OF GOVERNMENT

(SOCRATES, GLAUCON.)

  AND so, Glaucon, we have arrived at the conclusion that
in the perfect State wives and children are to be in com-
mon; and that all education and the pursuits of war
and peace are also to be common, and the best philosophers and
the bravest warriors are to be their kings?

  That, replied Glaucon, has been acknowledged.

  Yes, I said; and we have further acknowledged that the
governors, when appointed themselves, will take their soldiers
and place them in houses such as we were describing, which
are common to all, and contain nothing private, or individual;
and about their property, you remember what we agreed?

  Yes, I remember that no one was to have any of the ordinary
possessions of mankind; they were to be warrior athletes and
guardians, receiving from the other citizens, in lieu of annual
payment, only their maintenance, and they were to take care of
themselves and of the whole State.

  True, I said; and now that this division of our task is con-
cluded, let us find the point at which we digressed, that we may
return into the old path.

  There is no difficulty in returning; you implied, then as now,
that you had finished the description of the State: you said that
such a State was good, and that the man was good who an-
swered to it, although, as now appears, you had more excellent
things to relate both of State and man. And you said further,
that if this was the true form, then the others were false; and
of the false forms, you said, as I remember, that there were
four principal ones, and that their defects, and the defects of
the individuals corresponding to them, were worth examining.
When we had seen all the individuals, and finally agreed as to
who was the best and who was the worst of them, we were to
consider whether the best was not also the happiest, and the
worst the most miserable. I asked you what were the four
forms of government of which you spoke, and then Polemar-
chus and Adeimantus put in their word; and you began again,
and have found your way to the point at which we have now
arrived.

  Your recollection, I said, is most exact.

  Then, like a wrestler, he replied, you must put yourself again
in the same position; and let me ask the same questions, and do
you give me the same answer which you were about to give me
then.

  Yes, if I can, I will, I said.

  I shall particularly wish to hear what were the four consti-
tutions of which you were speaking.

  That question, I said, is easily answered: the four govern-
ments of which I spoke, so far as they have distinct names, are
first, those of Crete and Sparta, which are generally applauded;
what is termed oligarchy comes next; this is not equally ap-
proved, and is a form of government which teems with evils:
thirdly, democracy, which naturally follows oligarchy, although
very different: and lastly comes tyranny, great and famous,
which differs from them all, and is the fourth and worst dis-
order of a State. I do not know, do you? of any other consti-
tution which can be said to have a distinct character. There
are lordships and principalities which are bought and sold, and
some other intermediate forms of government. But these are
nondescripts and may be found equally among Hellenes and
among barbarians.

  Yes, he replied, we certainly hear of many curious forms of
government which exist among them.

  Do you know, I said, that governments vary as the disposi-
tions of men vary, and that there must be as many of the one
as there are of the other? For we cannot suppose that States
are made of "oak and rock," and not out of the human natures
which are in them, and which in a figure turn the scale and
draw other things after them?

  Yes, he said, the States are as the men are; they grow out of
human characters.

  Then if the constitutions of States are five, the dispositions
of individual minds will also be five?

  Certainly.

  Him who answers to aristocracy, and whom we rightly call
just and good, we have already described.

  We have.

  Then let us now proceed to describe the inferior sort of nat-
ures, being the contentious and ambitious, who answer to the
Spartan polity; also the oligarchical, democratical, and tyran-
nical. Let us place the most just by the side of the most un-
just, and when we see them we shall be able to compare the
relative happiness or unhappiness of him who leads a life of
pure justice or pure injustice. The inquiry will then be com-
pleted. And we shall know whether we ought to pursue injus-
tice, as Thrasymachus advises, or in accordance with the con-
clusions of the argument to prefer justice.

  Certainly, he replied, we must do as you say.

  Shall we follow our old plan, which we adopted with a view
to clearness, of taking the State first and then proceeding to
the individual, and begin with the government of honor?--I
know of no name for such a government other than timocracy
or perhaps timarchy. We will compare with this the like
character in the individual; and, after that, consider oligarchy
and the oligarchical man; and then again we will turn our
attention to democracy and the democratical man; and lastly,
we will go and view the city of tyranny, and once more take a
look into the tyrant's soul, and try to arrive at a satisfactory
decision.

  That way of viewing and judging of the matter will be very
suitable.

  First, then, I said, let us inquire how timocracy (the govern-
ment of honor) arises out of aristocracy (the government of
the best). Clearly, all political changes originate in divisions
of the actual governing power; a government which is united,
however small, cannot be moved.

  Very true, he said.

  In what way, then, will our city be moved, and in what man-
ner will the two classes of auxiliaries and rulers disagree among
themselves or with one another? Shall we, after the manner
of Homer, pray the muses to tell us "how discord first arose"?
Shall we imagine them in solemn mockery, to play and jest
with us as if we were children, and to address us in a lofty
tragic vein, making believe to be in earnest?

  How would they address us?

  After this manner: A city which is thus constituted can
hardly be shaken; but, seeing that everything which has a be-
ginning has also an end, even a constitution such as yours will
not last forever, but will in time be dissolved. And this is the
dissolution: In plants that grow in the earth, as well as in ani-
mals that move on the earth's surface, fertility and sterility of
soul and body occur when the circumferences of the circles of
each are completed, which in short-lived existences pass over
a short space, and in long-lived ones over a long space. But to
the knowledge of human fecundity and sterility all the wisdom
and education of your rulers will not attain; the laws which
regulate them will not be discovered by an intelligence which
is alloyed with sense, but will escape them, and they will bring
children into the world when they ought not. Now that which
is of divine birth has a period which is contained in a perfect
number, but the period of human birth is comprehended in a
number in which first increments by involution and evolution
(or squared and cubed) obtaining three intervals and four
terms of like and unlike, waxing and waning numbers, make
all the terms commensurable and agreeable to one another.
The base of these (3) with a third added (4), when combined
with five (20) and raised to the third power, furnishes two har-
monies; the first a square which is 100 times as great (400 =
4 x 100), and the other a figure having one side equal to the
former, but oblong, consisting of 100 numbers squared upon
rational diameters of a square (i.e., omitting fractions), the
side of which is five (7 x 7 = 49 x 100 = 4900), each of them
being less by one (than the perfect square which includes the
fractions, sc. 50) or less by two perfect squares of irrational
diameters (of a square the side of which is five = 50 + 50 =
100); and 100 cubes of three (27 x 100 = 2700 + 4900 +
400 = 8000). Now this number represents a geometrical
figure which has control over the good and evil of births. For
when your guardians are ignorant of the law of births, and
unite bride and bridegroom out of season, the children will not
be goodly or fortunate. And though only the best of them will
be appointed by their predecessor, still they will be unworthy
to hold their father's places, and when they come into power
as guardians they will soon be found to fail in taking care of
us, the muses, first by undervaluing music; which neglect will
soon extend to gymnastics; and hence the young men of your
State will be less cultivated. In the succeeding generation
rulers will be appointed who have lost the guardian power of
testing the metal of your different races, which, like Hesiod's,
are of gold and silver and brass and iron. And so iron will be
mingled with silver, and brass with gold, and hence there will
arise dissimilarity and inequality and irregularity, which always
and in all places are causes of hatred and war. This the muses
affirm to be the stock from which discord has sprung, wherever
arising; and this is their answer to us.

  Yes, and we may assume that they answer truly.

  Why, yes, I said, of course they answer truly; how can the
muses speak falsely?

  And what do the muses say next?

  When discord arose, then the two races were drawn different
ways: the iron and brass fell to acquiring money, and land, and
houses, and gold, and silver; but the gold and silver races, not
wanting money, but having the true riches in their own nature,
inclined toward virtue and the ancient order of things. There
was a battle between them, and at last they agreed to distribute
their land and houses among individual owners; and they en-
slaved their friends and maintainers, whom they had formerly
protected in the condition of freemen, and made of them sub-
jects and servants; and they themselves were engaged in war
and in keeping a watch against them.

  I believe that you have rightly conceived the origin of the
change.

  And the new government which thus arises will be of a
form intermediate between oligarchy and aristocracy?

  Very true.

  Such will be the change, and after the change has been made,
how will they proceed? Clearly, the new State, being in a
mean between oligarchy and the perfect State, will partly fol-
low one and partly the other, and will also have some pecul-
iarities.

  True, he said.

  In the honor given to rulers, in the abstinence of the warrior-
class from agriculture, handicrafts, and trade in general, in the
institution of common meals, and in the attention paid to gym-
nastics and military training--in all these respects this State
will resemble the former.

  True.

  But in the fear of admitting philosophers to power, because
they are no longer to be had simple and earnest, but are made
up of mixed elements; and in turning from them to passionate
and less complex characters, who are by nature fitted for war
rather than peace; and in the value set by them upon military
stratagems and contrivances, and in the waging of everlasting
wars--this State will be for the most part peculiar.

  Yes.

  Yes, I said; and men of this stamp will be covetous of money,
like those who live in oligarchies; they will have a fierce secret
longing after gold and silver, which they will hoard in dark
places, having magazines and treasuries of their own for the de-
posit and concealment of them; also castles which are just
nests for their eggs, and in which they will spend large sums
on their wives, or on any others whom they please.

  That is most true, he said.

  And they are miserly because they have no means of openly
acquiring the money which they prize; they will spend that
which is another man's on the gratification of their desires,
stealing their pleasures and running away like children from
the law, their father: they have been schooled not by gentle
influences but by force, for they have neglected her who is the
true muse, the companion of reason and philosophy, and have
honored gymnastics more than music.

  Undoubtedly, he said, the form of government which you
describe is a mixture of good and evil.

  Why, there is a mixture, I said; but one thing, and one thing
only, is predominantly seen--the spirit of contention and am-
bition; and these are due to the prevalence of the passionate or
spirited element.

  Assuredly, he said.

  Such is the origin and such the character of this State, which
has been described in outline only; the more perfect execution
was not required, for a sketch is enough to show the type of
the most perfectly just and most perfectly unjust; and to go
through all the States and all the characters of men, omitting
none of them, would be an interminable labor.

  Very true, he replied.

  Now what man answers to this form of government--how
did he come into being, and what is he like?

  I think, said Adeimantus, that in the spirit of contention
which characterizes him, he is not unlike our friend Glaucon.

  Perhaps, I said, he may be like him in that one point; but
there are other respects in which he is very different.

  In what respects?

  He should have more of self-assertion and be less cultivated
and yet a friend of culture; and he should be a good listener but
no speaker. Such a person is apt to be rough with slaves, un-
like the educated man, who is too proud for that; and he
will also be courteous to freemen, and remarkably obedient to
authority; he is a lover of power and a lover of honor; claiming
to be a ruler, not because he is eloquent, or on any ground of
that sort, but because he is a soldier and has performed feats of
arms; he is also a lover of gymnastic exercises and of the chase.

  Yes, that is the type of character that answers to timocracy.

  Such a one will despise riches only when he is young; but
as he gets older he will be more and more attracted to them,
because he has a piece of the avaricious nature in him, and is
not single-minded toward virtue, having lost his best guardian.

  Who was that? said Adeimantus.

  Philosophy, I said, tempered with music, who comes and
takes up her abode in a man, and is the only saviour of his vir-
tue throughout life.

  Good, he said.

  Such, I said, is the timocratical youth, and he is like the timo-
cratical State.

  Exactly.

  His origin is as follows: He is often the young son of a
brave father, who dwells in an ill-governed city, of which he
declines the honors and offices, and will not go to law, or exert
himself in any way, but is ready to waive his rights in order
that he may escape trouble.

  And how does the son come into being?

  The character of the son begins to develop when he hears
his mother complaining that her husband has no place in the
government, of which the consequence is that she has no prece-
dence among other women. Further, when she sees her hus-
band not very eager about money, and instead of battling and
railing in the law courts or assembly, taking whatever happens
to him quietly; and when she observes that his thoughts always
centre in himself, while he treats her with very considerable
indifference, she is annoyed, and says to her son that his father
is only half a man and far too easy-going: adding all the other
complaints about her own ill-treatment which women are so
fond of rehearsing.

  Yes, said Adeimantus, they give us plenty of them, and their
complaints are so like themselves.

  And you know, I said, that the old servants also, who are
supposed to be attached to the family, from time to time talk
privately in the same strain to the son; and if they see anyone
who owes money to his father, or is wronging him in any way,
and he fails to prosecute them, they tell the youth that when
he grows up he must retaliate upon people of this sort, and be
more of a man than his father. He has only to walk abroad
and he hears and sees the same sort of thing: those who do their
own business in the city are called simpletons, and held in no
esteem, while the busy-bodies are honored and applauded. The
result is that the young man, hearing and seeing all these things
--hearing, too, the words of his father, and having a nearer
view of his way of life, and making comparisons of him and
others--is drawn opposite ways: while his father is watering
and nourishing the rational principle in his soul, the others are
encouraging the passionate and appetitive; and he being not
originally of a bad nature, but having kept bad company, is at
last brought by their joint influence to a middle point, and gives
up the kingdom which is within him to the middle principle of
contentiousness and passion, and becomes arrogant and ambi-
tious.

  You seem to me to have described his origin perfectly.

  Then we have now, I said, the second form of government
and the second type of character?

  We have.

  Next, let us look at another man who, as AEschylus says,

  "Is set over against another State;"

or rather, as our plan requires, begin with the State.

  By all means.

  I believe that oligarchy follows next in order.

  And what manner of government do you term oligarchy?

  A government resting on a valuation of property, in which
the rich have power and the poor man is deprived of it.

  I understand, he replied.

  Ought I not to begin by describing how the change from
timocracy to oligarchy arises?

  Yes.

  Well, I said, no eyes are required in order to see how the one
passes into the other.

  How?

  The accumulation of gold in the treasury of private individ-
uals is the ruin of timocracy; they invent illegal modes of ex-
penditure; for what do they or their wives care about the law?

  Yes, indeed.

  And then one, seeing another grow rich, seeks to rival him,
and thus the great mass of the citizens become lovers of money.

  Likely enough.

  And so they grow richer and richer, and the more they think
of making a fortune the less they think of virtue; for when
riches and virtue are placed together in the scales of the balance
the one always rises as the other falls.

  True.

  And in proportion as riches and rich men are honored in the
State, virtue and the virtuous are dishonored.

  Clearly.

  And what is honored is cultivated, and that which has no
honor is neglected.

  That is obvious.

  And so at last, instead of loving contention and glory, men
become lovers of trade and money; they honor and look up to
the rich man, and make a ruler of him, and dishonor the poor
man.

  They do so.

  They next proceed to make a law which fixes a sum of money
as the qualification of citizenship; the sum is higher in one
place and lower in another, as the oligarchy is more or less ex-
clusive; and they allow no one whose property falls below the
amount fixed to have any share in the government. These
changes in the constitution they effect by force of arms, if in-
timidation has not already done their work.

  Very true.

  And this, speaking generally, is the way in which oligarchy
is established.

  Yes, he said; but what are the characteristics of this form of
government, and what are the defects of which we were
speaking?

  First of all, I said, consider the nature of the qualification
Just think what would happen if pilots were to be chosen ac-
cording to their property, and a poor man were refused permis-
sion to steer, even though he were a better pilot?

  You mean that they would shipwreck?

  Yes; and is not this true of the government of anything?

  I should imagine so.

  Except a city?--or would you include a city?

  Nay, he said, the case of a city is the strongest of all, inas-
much as the rule of a city is the greatest and most difficult
of all.

  This, then, will be the first great defect of oligarchy?

  Clearly.

  And here is another defect which is quite as bad.

  What defect?

  The inevitable division: such a State is not one, but two
States, the one of poor, the other of rich men; and they are
living on the same spot and always conspiring against one
another.

  That, surely, is at least as bad.

  Another discreditable feature is, that, for a like reason, they
are incapable of carrying on any war. Either they arm the
multitude, and then they are more afraid of them than of the
enemy; or, if they do not call them out in the hour of battle,
they are oligarchs indeed, few to fight as they are few to rule.
And at the same time their fondness for money makes them
unwilling to pay taxes.

  How discreditable!

  And, as we said before, under such a constitution the same
persons have too many callings--they are husbandmen, trades-
men, warriors, all in one. Does that look well?

  Anything but well.

  There is another evil which is, perhaps, the greatest of all,
and to which this State first begins to be liable.

  What evil?

  A man may sell all that he has, and another may acquire his
property; yet after the sale he may dwell in the city of which he
is no longer a part, being neither trader, nor artisan, nor horse-
man, nor hoplite, but only a poor, helpless creature.

  Yes, that is an evil which also first begins in this State.

  The evil is certainly not prevented there; for oligarchies have
both the extremes of great wealth and utter poverty.

  True.

  But think again: In his wealthy days, while he was spending
his money, was a man of this sort a whit more good to the State
for the purposes of citizenship? Or did he only seem to be a
member of the ruling body, although in truth he was neither
ruler nor subject, but just a spendthrift?

  As you say, he seemed to be a ruler, but was only a spend-
thrift.

  May we not say that this is the drone in the house who is
like the drone in the honeycomb, and that the one is the plague
of the city as the other is of the hive?

  Just so, Socrates.

  And God has made the flying drones, Adeimantus, all with-
out stings, whereas of the walking drones he has made some
without stings, but others have dreadful stings; of the stingless
class are those who in their old age end as paupers; of the
stingers come all the criminal class, as they are termed.

  Most true, he said.

  Clearly then, whenever you see paupers in a State, some-
where in that neighborhood there are hidden away thieves and
cut-purses and robbers of temples, and all sorts of malefactors.

  Clearly.

  Well, I said, and in oligarchical States do you not find
paupers?

  Yes, he said; nearly everybody is a pauper who is not a
ruler.

  And may we be so bold as to affirm that there are also many
criminals to be found in them, rogues who have stings, and
whom the authorities are careful to restrain by force?

  Certainly, we may be so bold.

  The existence of such persons is to be attributed to want of
education, ill-training, and an evil constitution of the State?

  True.

  Such, then, is the form and such are the evils of oligarchy;
and there may be many other evils.

  Very likely.

  Then oligarchy, or the form of government in which the
rulers are elected for their wealth, may now be dismissed. Let
us next proceed to consider the nature and origin of the indi-
vidual who answers to this State.

  By all means.

  Does not the timocratical man change into the oligarchical on
this wise?

  How?

  A time arrives when the representative of timocracy has a
son: at first he begins by emulating his father and walking in
his footsteps, but presently he sees him of a sudden foundering
against the State as upon a sunken reef, and he and all that he
has are lost; he may have been a general or some other high
officer who is brought to trial under a prejudice raised by in-
formers, and either put to death or exiled or deprived of the
privileges of a citizen, and all his property taken from him.

  Nothing more likely.

  And the son has seen and known all this--he is a ruined man,
and his fear has taught him to knock ambition and passion head-
foremost from his bosom's throne; humbled by poverty he takes
to money-making, and by mean and miserly savings and hard
work gets a fortune together. Is not such a one likely to seat
the concupiscent and covetous element on the vacant throne and
to suffer it to play the great king within him, girt with tiara and
chain and scimitar?

  Most true, he replied.

  And when he has made reason and spirit sit down on the
ground obediently on either side of their sovereign, and taught
them to know their place, he compels the one to think only of
how lesser sums may be turned into larger ones, and will not
allow the other to worship and admire anything but riches and
rich men, or to be ambitious of anything so much as the acquisi-
tion of wealth and the means of acquiring it.

  Of all changes, he said, there is none so speedy or so sure as
the conversion of the ambitious youth into the avaricious one.

  And the avaricious, I said, is the oligarchical youth?

  Yes, he said; at any rate the individual out of whom he came
is like the State out of which oligarchy came.

  Let us then consider whether there is any likeness between
them.

  Very good.

  First, then, they resemble one another in the value which they
set upon wealth?

  Certainly.

  Also in their penurious, laborious character; the individual
only satisfies his necessary appetites, and confines his expendi-
ture to them; his other desires he subdues, under the idea that
they are unprofitable.

  True.

  He is a shabby fellow, who saves something out of everything
and makes a purse for himself; and this is the sort of man
whom the vulgar applaud. Is he not a true image of the State
which he represents?

  He appears to me to be so; at any rate money is highly
valued by him as well as by the State.

  You see that he is not a man of cultivation, I said.

  I imagine not, he said; had he been educated he would never
have made a blind god director of his chorus, or given him chief
honor.

  Excellent! I said. Yet consider: Must we not further admit
that owing to this want of cultivation there will be found in him
drone-like desires as of pauper and rogue, which are forcibly
kept down by his general habit of life?

  True.

  Do you know where you will have to look if you want to
discover his rogueries?

  Where must I look?

  You should see him where he has some great opportunity of
acting dishonestly, as in the guardianship of an orphan.

  Aye.

  It will be clear enough then that in his ordinary dealings
which give him a reputation for honesty, he coerces his bad
passions by an enforced virtue; not making them see that they
are wrong, or taming them by reason, but by necessity and
fear constraining them, and because he trembles for his pos-
sessions.

  To be sure.

  Yes, indeed, my dear friend, but you will find that the natu-
ral desires of the drone commonly exist in him all the same
whenever he has to spend what is not his own.

  Yes, and they will be strong in him, too.

  The man, then, will be at war with himself; he will be two
men, and not one; but, in general, his better desires will be
found to prevail over his inferior ones.

  True.

  For these reasons such a one will be more respectable than
most people; yet the true virtue of a unanimous and harmonious
soul will flee far away and never come near him.

  I should expect so.

  And surely the miser individually will be an ignoble com-
petitor in a State for any prize of victory, or other object of
honorable ambition; he will not spend his money in the contest
for glory; so afraid is he of awakening his expensive appetites
and inviting them to help and join in the struggle; in true oli-
garchical fashion he fights with a small part only of his re-
sources, and the result commonly is that he loses the prize and
saves his money.

  Very true.

  Can we any longer doubt, then, that the miser and money-
maker answers to the oligarchical State?

  There can be no doubt.

  Next comes democracy; of this the origin and nature have
still to be considered by us; and then we will inquire into the
ways of the democratic man, and bring him up for judgment.

  That, he said, is our method.

  Well, I said, and how does the change from oligarchy into
democracy arise? Is it not on this wise: the good at which
such a State aims is to become as rich as possible, a desire which
is insatiable?

  What then?

  The rulers being aware that their power rests upon their
wealth, refuse to curtail by law the extravagance of the spend-
thrift youth because they gain by their ruin; they take interest
from them and buy up their estates and thus increase their own
wealth and importance?

  To be sure.

  There can be no doubt that the love of wealth and the spirit
of moderation cannot exist together in citizens of the same
State to any considerable extent; one or the other will be disre-
garded.

  That is tolerably clear.

  And in oligarchical States, from the general spread of care-
lessness and extravagance, men of good family have often been
reduced to beggary?

  Yes, often.

  And still they remain in the city; there they are, ready to
sting and fully armed, and some of them owe money, some have
forfeited their citizenship; a third class are in both predica-
ments; and they hate and conspire against those who have got
their property, and against everybody else, and are eager for
revolution.

  That is true.

  On the other hand, the men of business, stooping as they
walk, and pretending not even to see those whom they have
already ruined, insert their sting--that is, their money--into
someone else who is not on his guard against them, and recover
the parent sum many times over multiplied into a family of chil-
dren: and so they make drone and pauper to abound in the
State.

  Yes, he said, there are plenty of them--that is certain.

  The evil blazes up like a fire; and they will not extinguish it
either by restricting a man's use of his own property, or by
another remedy.

  What other?

  One which is the next best, and has the advantage of com-
pelling the citizens to look to their characters: Let there be a
general rule that everyone shall enter into voluntary contracts
at his own risk, and there will be less of this scandalous money-
making, and the evils of which we were speaking will be greatly
lessened in the State.

  Yes, they will be greatly lessened.

  At present the governors, induced by the motives which I
have named, treat their subjects badly; while they and their
adherents, especially the young men of the governing class, are
habituated to lead a life of luxury and idleness both of body and
mind; they do nothing, and are incapable of resisting either
pleasure or pain.

  Very true.

  They themselves care only for making money, and are as
indifferent as the pauper to the cultivation of virtue.

  Yes, quite as indifferent.

  Such is the state of affairs which prevails among them. And
often rulers and their subjects may come in one another's way,
whether on a journey or on some other occasion of meeting,
on a pilgrimage or a march, as fellow-soldiers or fellow-
sailors; aye, and they may observe the behavior of each other
in the very moment of danger--for where danger is, there is
no fear that the poor will be despised by the rich--and very
likely the wiry, sunburnt poor man may be placed in battle
at the side of a wealthy one who has never spoilt his com-
plexion and has plenty of superfluous flesh--when he sees such
a one puffing and at his wits'-end, how can he avoid drawing
the conclusion that men like him are only rich because no one
has the courage to despoil them? And when they meet in
private will not people be saying to one another, "Our war-
riors are not good for much"?

  Yes, he said, I am quite aware that this is their way of
talking.

  And, as in a body which is diseased the addition of a touch
from without may bring on illness, and sometimes even when
there is no external provocation, a commotion may arise with-
in--in the same way wherever there is weakness in the State
there is also likely to be illness, of which the occasion may
be very slight, the one party introducing from without their
oligarchical, the other their democratical allies, and then the
State falls sick, and is at war with herself; and may be at
times distracted, even when there is no external cause.

  Yes, surely.

  And then democracy comes into being after the poor have
conquered their opponents, slaughtering some and banishing
some, while to the remainder they give an equal share of free-
dom and power; and this is the form of government in which
the magistrates are commonly elected by lot.

  Yes, he said, that is the nature of democracy, whether the
revolution has been effected by arms, or whether fear has
caused the opposite party to withdraw.

  And now what is their manner of life, and what sort of a
government have they? for as the government is, such will
be the man.

  Clearly, he said.

  In the first place, are they not free; and is not the city full
of freedom and frankness--a man may say and do what he
likes?

  'Tis said so, he replied.

  And where freedom is, the individual is clearly able to
order for himself his own life as he pleases?

  Clearly.

  Then in this kind of State there will be the greatest variety
of human natures?

  There will.

  This, then, seems likely to be the fairest of States, being
like an embroidered robe which is spangled with every sort
of flower. And just as women and children think a variety
of colors to be of all things most charming, so there are many
men to whom this State, which is spangled with the manners
and characters of mankind, will appear to be the fairest of
States.

  Yes.

  Yes, my good sir, and there will be no better in which to
look for a government.

  Why?

  Because of the liberty which reigns there--they have a com-
plete assortment of constitutions; and he who has a mind to
establish a State, as we have been doing, must go to a democ-
racy as he would to a bazaar at which they sell them, and
pick out the one that suits him; then, when he has made his
choice, he may found his State.

  He will be sure to have patterns enough.

  And there being no necessity, I said, for you to govern in
this State, even if you have the capacity, or to be governed,
unless you like, or to go to war when the rest go to war, or
to be at peace when others are at peace, unless you are so
disposed--there being no necessity also, because some law for-
bids you to hold office or be a dicast, that you should not hold
office or be a dicast, if you have a fancy--is not this a way
of life which for the moment is supremely delightful?

  For the moment, yes.

  And is not their humanity to the condemned in some cases
quite charming? Have you not observed how, in a democracy,
many persons, although they have been sentenced to death or
exile, just stay where they are and walk about the world--
the gentleman parades like a hero, and nobody sees or cares?

  Yes, he replied, many and many a one.
See, too, I said, the forgiving spirit of democracy, and the
"don't care" about trifles, and the disregard which she shows
of all the fine principles which we solemnly laid down at the
foundation of the city--as when we said that, except in the
case of some rarely gifted nature, there never will be a good
man who has not from his childhood been used to play amid
things of beauty and make of them a joy and a study--how
grandly does she trample all these fine notions of ours under
her feet, never giving a thought to the pursuits which make
a statesman, and promoting to honor anyone who professes
to be the people's friend.

  Yes, she is of a noble spirit.

  These and other kindred characteristics are proper to
democracy, which is a charming form of government, full of
variety and disorder, and dispensing a sort of equality to equals
and unequals alike.

  We know her well.

  Consider now, I said, what manner of man the individual
is, or rather consider, as in the case of the State, how he
comes into being.

  Very good, he said.

  Is not this the way--he is the son of the miserly and oli-
garchical father who has trained him in his own habits?

  Exactly.

  And, like his father, he keeps under by force the pleasures
which are of the spending and not of the getting sort, being
those which are called unnecessary?

  Obviously.

  Would you like, for the sake of clearness, to distinguish
which are the necessary and which are the unnecessary pleas-
ures?

  I should.

  Are not necessary pleasures those of which we cannot get
rid, and of which the satisfaction is a benefit to us? And
they are rightly called so, because we are framed by nature
to desire both what is beneficial and what is necessary, and
cannot help it.

  True.

  We are not wrong therefore in calling them necessary?

  We are not.

  And the desires of which a man may get rid, if he takes
pains from his youth upward--of which the presence, more-
over, does no good, and in some cases the reverse of good--
shall we not be right in saying that all these are unnecessary?

  Yes, certainly.

  Suppose we select an example of either kind, in order that
we may have a general notion of them?

  Very good.

  Will not the desire of eating, that is, of simple food and con-
diments, in so far as they are required for health and strength,
be of the necessary class?

  That is what I should suppose.

  The pleasure of eating is necessary in two ways; it does
us good and it is essential to the continuance of life?

  Yes.

  But the condiments are only necessary in so far as they
are good for health?

  Certainly.

  And the desire which goes beyond this, of more delicate
food, or other luxuries, which might generally be got rid of,
if controlled and trained in youth, and is hurtful to the body,
and hurtful to the soul in the pursuit of wisdom and virtue,
may be rightly called unnecessary?

  Very true.

  May we not say that these desires spend, and that the
others make money because they conduce to production?

  Certainly.

  And of the pleasures of love, and all other pleasures, the
same holds good?

  True.

  And the drone of whom we spoke was he who was sur-
feited in pleasures and desires of this sort, and was the slave
of the unnecessary desires, whereas he who was subject to
the necessary only was miserly and oligarchical?

  Very true.

  Again, let us see how the democratical man goes out of
the oligarchical: the following, as I suspect, is commonly the
process.

  What is the process?

  When a young man who has been brought up as we were
just now describing, in a vulgar and miserly way, has tasted
drones' honey and has come to associate with fierce and crafty
natures who are able to provide for him all sorts of refine-
ments and varieties of pleasure--then, as you may imagine,
the change will begin of the oligarchical principle within him
into the democratical?

  Inevitably.

  And as in the city like was helping like, and the change
was effected by an alliance from without assisting one division
of the citizens, so too the young man is changed by a class
of desires coming from without to assist the desires within
him, that which is akin and alike again helping that which
is akin and alike?

  Certainly.

  And if there be any ally which aids the oligarchical prin-
ciple within him, whether the influence of a father or of kin-
dred, advising or rebuking him, then there arise in his soul
a faction and an opposite faction, and he goes to war with
himself.

  It must be so.

  And there are times when the democratical principle gives
way to the oligarchical, and some of his desires die, and others
are banished; a spirit of reverence enters into the young man's
soul, and order is restored.

  Yes, he said, that sometimes happens.

  And then, again, after the old desires have been driven out,
fresh ones spring up, which are akin to them, and because he
their father does not know how to educate them, wax fierce
and numerous.

  Yes, he said, that is apt to be the way.

  They draw him to his old associates, and holding secret in-
tercourse with them, breed and multiply in him.

  Very true.

  At length they seize upon the citadel of the young man's
soul, which they perceive to be void of all accomplishments
and fair pursuits and true words, which make their abode in
the minds of men who are dear to the gods, and are their best
guardians and sentinels.

  None better.

  False and boastful conceits and phrases mount upward and
take their place.

  They are certain to do so.

  And so the young man returns into the country of the lotus-
eaters, and takes up his dwelling there, in the face of all men;
and if any help be sent by his friends to the oligarchical part
of him, the aforesaid vain conceits shut the gate of the King's
fastness; and they will neither allow the embassy itself to
enter, nor if private advisers offer the fatherly counsel of the
aged will they listen to them or receive them. There is a bat-
tle and they gain the day, and then modesty, which they call
silliness, is ignominiously thrust into exile by them, and
temperance, which they nick-name unmanliness, is trampled in
the mire and cast forth; they persuade men that moderation
and orderly expenditure are vulgarity and meanness, and so,
by the help of a rabble of evil appetites, they drive them be-
yond the border.

  Yes, with a will.

  And when they have emptied and swept clean the soul of
him who is now in their power and who is being initiated by
them in great mysteries, the next thing is to bring back to their
house insolence and anarchy and waste and impudence in
bright array, having garlands on their heads, and a great com-
pany with them, hymning their praises and calling them by
sweet names; insolence they term "breeding," and anarchy
"liberty," and waste "magnificence," and impudence "cour-
age." And so the young man passes out of his original nature,
which was trained in the school of necessity, into the freedom
and libertinism of useless and unnecessary pleasures.

  Yes, he said, the change in him is visible enough.

  After this he lives on, spending his money and labor and
time on unnecessary pleasures quite as much as on necessary
ones; but if he be fortunate, and is not too much disordered
in his wits, when years have elapsed, and the heyday of pas-
sion is over--supposing that he then readmits into the city
some part of the exiled virtues, and does not wholly give him-
self up to their successors--in that case he balances his pleas-
ures and lives in a sort of equilibrium, putting the govern-
ment of himself into the hands of the one which comes first
and wins the turn; and when he has had enough of that, then
into the hands of another; he despises none of them, but
encourages them all equally.

  Very true, he said.

  Neither does he receive or let pass into the fortress any true
word of advice; if anyone says to him that some pleasures
are the satisfactions of good and noble desires, and others of
evil desires, and that he ought to use and honor some, and
chastise and master the others--whenever this is repeated to
him he shakes his head and says that they are all alike, and
that one is as good as another.

  Yes, he said; that is the way with him.

  Yes, I said, he lives from day to day indulging the appetite
of the hour; and sometimes he is lapped in drink and strains
of the flute; then he becomes a water-drinker, and tries to
get thin; then he takes a turn at gymnastics; sometimes
idling and neglecting everything, then once more living the
life of a philosopher; often he is busy with politics, and starts
to his feet and says and does whatever comes into his head;
and, if he is emulous of anyone who is a warrior, off he is
in that direction, or of men of business, once more in that.
His life has neither law nor order; and this distracted exist-
ence he terms joy and bliss and freedom; and so he goes on.

  Yes, he replied, he is all liberty and equality.

  Yes, I said; his life is motley and manifold and an epitome
of the lives of many; he answers to the State which we de-
scribed as fair and spangled. And many a man and many
a woman will take him for their pattern, and many a con-
stitution and many an example of manners are contained in him.

  Just so.

  Let him then be set over against democracy; he may truly
be called the democratic man.

  Let that be his place, he said.

  Last of all comes the most beautiful of all, man and State
alike, tyranny and the tyrant; these we have now to consider.

  Quite true, he said.

  Say then, my friend, in what manner does tyranny arise?
--that it has a democratic origin is evident.

  Clearly.

  And does not tyranny spring from democracy in the same
manner as democracy from oligarchy--I mean, after a sort?

  How?

  The good which oligarchy proposed to itself and the means
by which it was maintained was excess of wealth--am I not
right?

  Yes.

  And the insatiable desire of wealth and the neglect of all
other things for the sake of money-getting were also the ruin
of oligarchy?

  True.

  And democracy has her own good, of which the insatiable
desire brings her to dissolution?

  What good?

  Freedom, I replied; which, as they tell you in a democracy,
is the glory of the State--and that therefore in a democracy
alone will the freeman of nature deign to dwell.

  Yes; the saying is in everybody's mouth.

  I was going to observe, that the insatiable desire of this
and the neglect of other things introduce the change in democ-
racy, which occasions a demand for tyranny.

  How so?

  When a democracy which is thirsting for freedom has evil
cup-bearers presiding over the feast, and has drunk too deeply
of the strong wine of freedom, then, unless her rulers are very
amenable and give a plentiful draught, she calls them to ac-
count and punishes them, and says that they are cursed oli-
garchs.

  Yes, he replied, a very common occurrence.

  Yes, I said; and loyal citizens are insultingly termed by
her "slaves" who hug their chains, and men of naught; she
would have subjects who are like rulers, and rulers who are
like subjects: these are men after her own heart, whom she
praises and honors both in private and public. Now, in such
a State, can liberty have any limit?

  Certainly not.

  By degrees the anarchy finds a way into private houses, and
ends by getting among the animals and infecting them.

  How do you mean?

  I mean that the father grows accustomed to descend to
the level of his sons and to fear them, and the son is on a level
with his father, he having no respect or reverence for either
of his parents; and this is his freedom; and the metic is equal
with the citizen, and the citizen with the metic, and the
stranger is quite as good as either.

  Yes, he said, that is the way.

  And these are not the only evils, I said--there are several
lesser ones: In such a state of society the master fears and
flatters his scholars, and the scholars despise their masters
and tutors; young and old are all alike; and the young man
is on a level with the old, and is ready to compete with him
in word or deed; and old men condescend to the young and
are full of pleasantry and gayety; they are loth to be thought
morose and authoritative, and therefore they adopt the man-
ners of the young.

  Quite true, he said.

  The last extreme of popular liberty is when the slave bought
with money, whether male or female, is just as free as his
or her purchaser; nor must I forget to tell of the liberty and
equality of the two sexes in relation to each other.

  Why not, as AEschylus says, utter the word which rises to
our lips?

  That is what I am doing, I replied; and I must add that
no one who does not know would believe how much greater
is the liberty which the animals who are under the dominion
of man have in a democracy than in any other State: for,
truly, the she-dogs, as the proverb says, are as good as their
she-mistresses, and the horses and asses have a way of march-
ing along with all the rights and dignities of freemen; and
they will run at anybody who comes in their way if he does
not leave the road clear for them: and all things are just
ready to burst with liberty.

  When I take a country walk, he said, I often experience
what you describe. You and I have dreamed the same thing.

  And above all, I said, and as the result of all, see how sen-
sitive the citizens become; they chafe impatiently at the least
touch of authority, and at length, as you know, they cease
to care even for the laws, written or unwritten; they will
have no one over them.

  Yes, he said, I know it too well.

  Such, my friend, I said, is the fair and glorious beginning
out of which springs tyranny.

  Glorious indeed, he said. But what is the next step?

  The ruin of oligarchy is the ruin of democracy; the same
disease magnified and intensified by liberty overmasters democ-
racy--the truth being that the excessive increase of anything
often causes a reaction in the opposite direction; and this is
the case not only in the seasons and in vegetable and animal
life, but above all in forms of government.

  True.

  The excess of liberty, whether in States or individuals,
seems only to pass into excess of slavery.

  Yes, the natural order.

  And so tyranny naturally arises out of democracy, and the
most aggravated form of tyranny and slavery out of the most
extreme form of liberty?

  As we might expect.

  That, however, was not, as I believe, your question--you
rather desired to know what is that disorder which is gen-
erated alike in oligarchy and democracy, and is the ruin of
both?

  Just so, he replied.

  Well, I said, I meant to refer to the class of idle spend-
thrifts, of whom the more courageous are the leaders and the
more timid the followers, the same whom we were compar-
ing to drones, some stingless, and others having stings.

  A very just comparison.

  These two classes are the plagues of every city in which
they are generated, being what phlegm and bile are to the
body. And the good physician and lawgiver of the State
ought, like the wise bee-master, to keep them at a distance and
prevent, if possible, their ever coming in; and if they have
anyhow found a way in, then he should have them and their
cells cut out as speedily as possible.

  Yes, by all means, he said.

  Then, in order that we may see clearly what we are doing,
let us imagine democracy to be divided, as indeed it is, into
three classes; for in the first place freedom creates rather more
drones in the democratic than there were in the oligarchical
State.

  That is true.

  And in the democracy they are certainly more intensified.

  How so?

  Because in the oligarchical State they are disqualified and
driven from office, and therefore they cannot train or gather
strength; whereas in a democracy they are almost the en-
tire ruling power, and while the keener sort speak and act,
the rest keep buzzing about the bema and do not suffer a word
to be said on the other side; hence in democracies almost
everything is managed by the drones.

  Very true, he said.

  Then there is another class which is always being severed
from the mass.

  What is that?

  They are the orderly class, which in a nation of traders is
sure to be the richest.

  Naturally so.

  They are the most squeezable persons and yield the largest
amount of honey to the drones.

  Why, he said, there is little to be squeezed out of people
who have little.

  And this is called the wealthy class, and the drones feed
upon them.

  That is pretty much the case, he said.

  The people are a third class, consisting of those who work
with their own hands; they are not politicians, and have not
much to live upon. This, when assembled, is the largest and
most powerful class in a democracy.

  True, he said; but then the multitude is seldom willing to
congregate unless they get a little honey.

  And do they not share? I said. Do not their leaders de-
prive the rich of their estates and distribute them among the
people; at the same time taking care to reserve the larger
part for themselves?

  Why, yes, he said, to that extent the people do share.

  And the persons whose property is taken from them are
compelled to defend themselves before the people as they best
can?

  What else can they do?

  And then, although they may have no desire of change, the
others charge them with plotting against the people and being
friends of oligarchy?
True.

  And the end is that when they see the people, not of their
own accord, but through ignorance, and because they are de-
ceived by informers, seeking to do them wrong, then at last
they are forced to become oligarchs in reality; they do not
wish to be, but the sting of the drones torments them and
breeds revolution in them.

  That is exactly the truth.

  Then come impeachments and judgments and trials of one
another.

  True.

  The people have always some champion whom they set over
them and nurse into greatness.

  Yes, that is their way.
This, and no other, is the root from which a tyrant springs;
when he first appears above ground he is a protector.

  Yes, that is quite clear.
How, then, does a protector begin to change into a tyrant?
Clearly when he does what the man is said to do in the tale
of the Arcadian temple of Lycaean Zeus.

  What tale?

  The tale is that he who has tasted the entrails of a single
human victim minced up with the entrails of other victims is
destined to become a wolf. Did you never hear it?

  Oh, yes.

  And the protector of the people is like him; having a mob
entirely at his disposal, he is not restrained from shedding the
blood of kinsmen; by the favorite method of false accusa-
tion he brings them into court and murders them, making the
life of man to disappear, and with unholy tongue and lips
tasting the blood of his fellow-citizens; some he kills and
others he banishes, at the same time hinting at the abolition
of debts and partition of lands: and after this, what will be
his destiny? Must he not either perish at the hands of his
enemies, or from being a man become a wolf--that is, a tyrant?

  Inevitably.

  This, I said, is he who begins to make a party against the
rich?

  The same.

  After a while he is driven out, but comes back, in spite of
his enemies, a tyrant full grown.

  That is clear.

  And if they are unable to expel him, or to get him con-
demned to death by a public accusation, they conspire to assas-
sinate him.

  Yes, he said, that is their usual way.

  Then comes the famous request for a body-guard, which
is the device of all those who have got thus far in their tyran-
nical career--"Let not the people's friend," as they say, "be
lost to them."

  Exactly.

  The people readily assent; all their fears are for him--they
have none for themselves.

  Very true.

  And when a man who is wealthy and is also accused of
being an enemy of the people sees this, then, my friend, as
the oracle said to Croesus,

  "By pebbly Hermus's shore he flees and rests not, and is not
   ashamed to be a coward."

  And quite right too, said he, for if he were, he would never
be ashamed again.

  But if he is caught he dies.

  Of course.

  And he, the protector of whom we spoke, is to be seen, not
"larding the plain" with his bulk, but himself the overthrower
of many, standing up in the chariot of State with the reins in
his hand, no longer protector, but tyrant absolute.

  No doubt, he said.

  And now let us consider the happiness of the man, and
also of the State in which a creature like him is generated.

  Yes, he said, let us consider that.

  At first, in the early days of his power, he is full of smiles,
and he salutes everyone whom he meets; he to be called a
tyrant, who is making promises in public and also in private!
liberating debtors, and distributing land to the people and his
followers, and wanting to be so kind and good to everyone!

  Of course, he said.

  But when he has disposed of foreign enemies by conquest
or treaty, and there is nothing to fear from them, then he
is always stirring up some war or other, in order that the
people may require a leader.

  To be sure.

  Has he not also another object, which is that they may be
impoverished by payment of taxes, and thus compelled to de-
vote themselves to their daily wants and therefore less likely
to conspire against him?
Clearly.

  And if any of them are suspected by him of having notions
of freedom, and of resistance to his authority, he will have
a good pretext for destroying them by placing them at the
mercy of the enemy; and for all these reasons the tyrant
must be always getting up a war.

  He must.

  Now he begins to grow unpopular.

  A necessary result.

  Then some of those who joined in setting him up, and who
are in power, speak their minds to him and to one another,
and the more courageous of them cast in his teeth what is
being done.

  Yes, that may be expected.

  And the tyrant, if he means to rule, must get rid of them;
he cannot stop while he has a friend or an enemy who is
good for anything.

  He cannot.

  And therefore he must look about him and see who is val-
iant, who is high-minded, who is wise, who is wealthy; happy
man, he is the enemy of them all, and must seek occasion
against them whether he will or no, until he has made a pur-
gation of the State.

  Yes, he said, and a rare purgation.

  Yes, I said, not the sort of purgation which the physicians
make of the body; for they take away the worse and leave
the better part, but he does the reverse.

  If he is to rule, I suppose that he cannot help himself.

  What a blessed alternative, I said: to be compelled to
dwell only with the many bad, and to be by them hated, or
not to live at all!

  Yes, that is the alternative.

  And the more detestable his actions are to the citizens the
more satellites and the greater devotion in them will he re-
quire?

  Certainly.

  And who are the devoted band, and where will he procure
them?

  They will flock to him, he said, of their own accord, if he
pays them.

  By the dog! I said, here are more drones, of every sort
and from every land.

  Yes, he said, there are.

  But will he not desire to get them on the spot?

  How do you mean?

  He will rob the citizens of their slaves; he will then set
them free and enrol them in his body-guard.

  To be sure, he said; and he will be able to trust them best
of all.

  What a blessed creature, I said, must this tyrant be; he
has put to death the others and has these for his trusted friends.

  Yes, he said; they are quite of his sort.

  Yes, I said, and these are the new citizens whom he has
called into existence, who admire him and are his companions,
while the good hate and avoid him.

  Of course.

  Verily, then, tragedy is a wise thing and Euripides a great
tragedian.

  Why so?

  Why, because he is the author of the pregnant saying,

  "Tyrants are wise by living with the wise;"

and he clearly meant to say that they are the wise whom the
tyrant makes his companions.

  Yes, he said, and he also praises tyranny as godlike; and
many other things of the same kind are said by him and by
the other poets.

  And therefore, I said, the tragic poets being wise men will
forgive us and any others who live after our manner, if we
do not receive them into our State, because they are the eulo-
gists of tyranny.

  Yes, he said, those who have the wit will doubtless forgive
us.

  But they will continue to go to other cities and attract mobs,
and hire voices fair and loud and persuasive, and draw the
cities over to tyrannies and democracies.

  Very true.

  Moreover, they are paid for this and receive honor--the
greatest honor, as might be expected, from tyrants, and the
next greatest from democracies; but the higher they ascend
our constitution hill, the more their reputation fails, and seems
unable from shortness of breath to proceed farther.

  True.

  But we are wandering from the subject: Let us therefore
return and inquire how the tyrant will maintain that fair,
and numerous, and various, and ever-changing army of his.

  If, he said, there are sacred treasures in the city, he will
confiscate and spend them; and in so far as the fortunes of
attainted persons may suffice, he will be able to diminish the
taxes which he would otherwise have to impose upon the
people.

  And when these fail?

  Why, clearly, he said, then he and his boon companions,
whether male or female, will be maintained out of his father's
estate.

  You mean to say that the people, from whom he has de-
rived his being, will maintain him and his companions?

  Yes, he said; they cannot help themselves.

  But what if the people fly into a passion, and aver that a
grown-up son ought not to be supported by his father, but
that the father should be supported by the son? The father
did not bring him into being, or settle him in life, in order
that when his son became a man he should himself be the ser-
vant of his own servants and should support him and his rab-
ble of slaves and companions; but that his son should pro-
tect him, and that by his help he might be emancipated from
the government of the rich and aristocratic, as they are termed.
And so he bids him and his companions depart, just as any
other father might drive out of the house a riotous son and
his undesirable associates.

  By heaven, he said, then the parent will discover what a
monster he has been fostering in his bosom; and, when he
wants to drive him out, he will find that he is weak and his
son strong.

  Why, you do not mean to say that the tyrant will use vio-
lence? What! beat his father if he opposes him?

  Yes, he will, having first disarmed him.

  Then he is a parricide, and a cruel guardian of an aged
parent; and this is real tyranny, about which there can be
no longer a mistake: as the saying is, the people who would
escape the smoke which is the slavery of freemen, has fallen
into the fire which is the tyranny of slaves. Thus liberty,
getting out of all order and reason, passes into the harshest
and bitterest form of slavery.

  True, he said.

  Very well; and may we not rightly say that we have suffi-
ciently discussed the nature of tyranny, and the manner of
the transition from democracy to tyranny?

  Yes, quite enough, he said.


                       BOOK IX
          ON WRONG OR RIGHT GOVERNMENT, AND THE
                  PLEASURES OF EACH

(SOCRATES, ADEIMANTUS.)

  LAST of all comes the tyrannical man; about whom we
have once more to ask, how is he formed out of the
democratical? and how does he live, in happiness or
in misery?

  Yes, he said, he is the only one remaining.

  There is, however, I said, a previous question which re-
mains unanswered.

  What question?

  I do not think that we have adequately determined the nat-
ure and number of the appetites, and until this is accom-
plished the inquiry will always be confused.

  Well, he said, it is not too late to supply the omission.

  Very true, I said; and observe the point which I want to
understand: Certain of the unnecessary pleasures and appe-
tites I conceive to be unlawful; everyone appears to have
them, but in some persons they are controlled by the laws
and by reason, and the better desires prevail over them--
either they are wholly banished or they become few and weak;
while in the case of others they are stronger, and there are
more of them.

  Which appetites do you mean?

  I mean those which are awake when the reasoning and hu-
man and ruling power is asleep; then the wild beast within
us, gorged with meat or drink, starts up and, having shaken
off sleep, goes forth to satisfy his desires; and there is no
conceivable folly or crime--not excepting incest or any other
unnatural union, or parricide, or the eating of forbidden food
--which at such a time, when he has parted company with
all shame and sense, a man may not be ready to commit.

  Most true, he said.

  But when a man's pulse is healthy and temperate, and when
before going to sleep he has awakened his rational powers, and
fed them on noble thoughts and inquiries, collecting himself
in meditation; after having first indulged his appetites neither
too much nor too little, but just enough to lay them to sleep,
and prevent them and their enjoyments and pains from in-
terfering with the higher principle--which he leaves in the soli-
tude of pure abstraction, free to contemplate and aspire to the
knowledge of the unknown, whether in past, present, or future:
when again he has allayed the passionate element, if he has
a quarrel against anyone--I say, when, after pacifying the
two irrational principles, he rouses up the third, which is rea-
son, before he takes his rest, then, as you know, he attains
truth most nearly, and is least likely to be the sport of fan-
tastic and lawless visions.

  I quite agree.

  In saying this I have been running into a digression; but
the point which I desire to note is that in all of us, even in
good men, there is a lawless wild-beast nature, which peers
out in sleep. Pray, consider whether I am right, and you
agree with me.

  Yes, I agree.

  And now remember the character which we attributed to
the democratic man. He was supposed from his youth up-
ward to have been trained under a miserly parent, who en-
couraged the saving appetites in him, but discountenanced the
unnecessary, which aim only at amusement and ornament?

  True.

  And then he got into the company of a more refined, licen-
tious sort of people, and taking to all their wanton ways
rushed into the opposite extreme from an abhorrence of his
father's meanness. At last, being a better man than his cor-
ruptors, he was drawn in both directions until he halted mid-
way and led a life, not of vulgar and slavish passion, but of
what he deemed moderate indulgence in various pleasures.
After this manner the democrat was generated out of the
oligarch?

  Yes, he said; that was our view of him, and is so still.

  And now, I said, years will have passed away, and you
must conceive this man, such as he is, to have a son, who is
brought up in his father's principles.

  I can imagine him.

  Then you must further imagine the same thing to happen
to the son which has already happened to the father: he is
drawn into a perfectly lawless life, which by his seducers is
termed perfect liberty; and his father and friends take part
with his moderate desires, and the opposite party assist the
opposite ones. As soon as these dire magicians and tyrant-
makers find that they are losing their hold on him, they con-
trive to implant in him a master-passion, to be lord over his
idle and spendthrift lusts--a sort of monstrous winged drone
--that is the only image which will adequately describe him.

  Yes, he said, that is the only adequate image of him.

  And when his other lusts, amid clouds of incense and per-
fumes and garlands and wines, and all the pleasures of a dis-
solute life, now let loose, come buzzing around him, nourish-
ing to the utmost the sting of desire which they implant in
his drone-like nature, then at last this lord of the soul, hav-
ing Madness for the captain of his guard, breaks out into a
frenzy; and if he finds in himself any good opinions or appe-
tites in process of formation, and there is in him any sense
of shame remaining, to these better principles he puts an end,
and casts them forth until he has purged away temperance and
brought in madness to the full.

  Yes, he said, that is the way in which the tyrannical man
is generated.

  And is not this the reason why, of old, love has been called
a tyrant?

  I should not wonder.

  Further, I said, has not a drunken man also the spirit of
a tyrant?

  He has.

  And you know that a man who is deranged, and not right
in his mind, will fancy that he is able to rule, not only over
men, but also over the gods?

  That he will.

  And the tyrannical man in the true sense of the word comes
into being when, either under the influence of nature or
habit, or both, he becomes drunken, lustful, passionate? O
my friend, is not that so?

  Assuredly.

  Such is the man and such is his origin. And next, how
does he live?

  Suppose, as people facetiously say, you were to tell me.

  I imagine, I said, at the next step in his progress, that there
will be feasts and carousals and revellings and courtesans, and
all that sort of thing; Love is the lord of the house within
him, and orders all the concerns of his soul.

  That is certain.

  Yes; and every day and every night desires grow up many
and formidable, and their demands are many.

  They are indeed, he said.

  His revenues, if he has any, are soon spent.

  True.

  Then come debt and the cutting down of his property.

  Of course.

  When he has nothing left, must not his desires, crowding
in the nest like young ravens, be crying aloud for food; and
he, goaded on by them, and especially by love himself, who
is in a manner the captain of them, is in a frenzy, and would
fain discover whom he can defraud or despoil of his property,
in order that he may gratify them?

  Yes, that is sure to be the case.

  He must have money, no matter how, if he is to escape
horrid pains and pangs.

  He must.

  And as in himself there was a succession of pleasures, and
the new got the better of the old and took away their rights,
so he being younger will claim to have more than his father
and his mother, and if he has spent his own share of the prop-
erty, he will take a slice of theirs.

  No doubt he will.

  And if his parents will not give way, then he will try first
of all to cheat and deceive them.

  Very true.

  And if he fails, then he will use force and plunder them.

  Yes, probably.

  And if the old man and woman fight for their own, what
then, my friend? Will the creature feel any compunction at
tyrannizing over them?

  Nay, he said, I should not feel at all comfortable about his
parents.

  But, O heavens! Adeimantus, on account of some new-
fangled love of a harlot, who is anything but a necessary con-
nection, can you believe that he would strike the mother who
is his ancient friend and necessary to his very existence, and
would place her under the authority of the other, when she
is brought under the same roof with her; or that, under like
circumstances, he would do the same to his withered old
father, first and most indispensable of friends, for the sake
of some newly found blooming youth who is the reverse of
indispensable?

  Yes, indeed, he said; I believe that he would.

  Truly, then, I said, a tyrannical son is a blessing to his
father and mother.

  He is indeed, he replied.

  He first takes their property, and when that fails, and
pleasures are beginning to swarm in the hive of his soul, then
he breaks into a house, or steals the garments of some nightly
wayfarer; next he proceeds to clear a temple. Meanwhile
the old opinions which he had when a child, and which gave
judgment about good and evil, are overthrown by those others
which have just been emancipated, and are now the body-
guard of love and share his empire. These in his democratic
days, when he was still subject to the laws and to his father,
were only let loose in the dreams of sleep. But now that
he is under the dominion of Love, he becomes always and in
waking reality what he was then very rarely and in a dream
only; he will commit the foulest murder, or eat forbidden
food, or be guilty of any other horrid act. Love is his tyrant,
and lives lordly in him and lawlessly, and being himself a
king, leads him on, as a tyrant leads a State, to the per-
formance of any reckless deed by which he can maintain him-
self and the rabble of his associates, whether those whom evil
communications have brought in from without, or those whom
he himself has allowed to break loose within him by reason
of a similar evil nature in himself. Have we not here a pict-
ure of his way of life?

  Yes, indeed, he said.

  And if there are only a few of them in the State, and the
rest of the people are well disposed, they go away and be-
come the body-guard of mercenary soldiers of some other
tyrant who may probably want them for a war; and if there
is no war, they stay at home and do many little pieces of mis-
chief in the city.

  What sort of mischief?

  For example, they are the thieves, burglars, cut-purses, foot-
pads, robbers of temples, man-stealers of the community; or
if they are able to speak, they turn informers and bear false
witness and take bribes.

  A small catalogue of evils, even if the perpetrators of them
are few in number.

  Yes, I said; but small and great are comparative terms,
and all these things, in the misery and evil which they inflict
upon a State, do not come within a thousand miles of the
tyrant; when this noxious class and their followers grow
numerous and become conscious of their strength, assisted by
the infatuation of the people, they choose from among them-
selves the one who has most of the tyrant in his own soul,
and him they create their tyrant.

  Yes, he said, and he will be the most fit to be a tyrant.

  If the people yield, well and good; but if they resist him,
as he began by beating his own father and mother, so now,
if he has the power, he beats them, and will keep his dear
old fatherland or motherland, as the Cretans say, in subjec-
tion to his young retainers whom he has introduced to be their
rulers and masters. This is the end of his passions and desires.

  Exactly.

  When such men are only private individuals and before they
get power, this is their character; they associate entirely with
their own flatterers or ready tools; or if they want anything
from anybody, they in their turn are equally ready to bow
down before them: they profess every sort of affection for
them; but when they have gained their point they know them
no more.

  Yes, truly.

  They are always either the masters or servants and never
the friends of anybody; the tyrant never tastes of true free-
dom or friendship.

  Certainly not.

  And may we not rightly call such men treacherous?

  No question.

  Also they are utterly unjust, if we were right in our no-
tion of justice?

  Yes, he said, and we were perfectly right.

  Let us, then, sum up in a word, I said, the character of the
worst man: he is the waking reality of what we dreamed.

  Most true.

  And this is he who being by nature most of a tyrant bears
rule, and the longer he lives the more of a tyrant he becomes.

  That is certain, said Glaucon, taking his turn to answer.

  And will not he who has been shown to be the wickedest,
be also the most miserable? and he who has tyrannized long-
est and most, most continually and truly miserable; although
this may not be the opinion of men in general?

  Yes, he said, inevitably.

  And must not the tyrannical man be like the tyrannical
State, and the democratical man like the democratical State;
and the same of the others?

  Certainly.

  And as State is to State in virtue and happiness, so is man
in relation to man?

  To be sure.

  Then comparing our original city, which was under a king,
and the city which is under a tyrant, how do they stand as to
virtue?

  They are the opposite extremes, he said, for one is the very
best and the other is the very worst.

  There can be no mistake, I said, as to which is which, and
therefore I will at once inquire whether you would arrive at
a similar decision about their relative happiness and misery.
And here we must not allow ourselves to be panic-stricken at
the apparition of the tyrant, who is only a unit and may per-
haps have a few retainers about him; but let us go as we
ought into every corner of the city and look all about, and
then we will give our opinion.

  A fair invitation, he replied; and I see, as everyone must,
that a tyranny is the wretchedest form of government, and the
rule of a king the happiest.

  And in estimating the men, too, may I not fairly make a
like request, that I should have a judge whose mind can enter
into and see through human nature? he must not be like a
child who looks at the outside and is dazzled at the pompous
aspect which the tyrannical nature assumes to the beholder,
but let him be one who has a clear insight. May I suppose
that the judgment is given in the hearing of us all by one
who is able to judge, and has dwelt in the same place with
him, and been present at his daily life and known him in his
family relations, where he may be seen stripped of his tragedy
attire, and again in the hour of public danger--he shall tell
us about the happiness and misery of the tyrant when com-
pared with other men?

  That again, he said, is a very fair proposal.

  Shall I assume that we ourselves are able and experienced
judges and have before now met with such a person? We
shall then have someone who will answer our inquiries.

  By all means.

  Let me ask you not to forget the parallel of the individual
and the State; bearing this in mind, and glancing in turn
from one to the other of them, will you tell me their respec-
tive conditions?

  What do you mean? he asked.

  Beginning with the State, I replied, would you say that a
city which is governed by a tyrant is free or enslaved?

  No city, he said, can be more completely enslaved.

  And yet, as you see, there are freemen as well as masters
in such a State?

  Yes, he said, I see that there are--a few; but the people,
speaking generally, and the best of them are miserably de-
graded and enslaved.

  Then if the man is like the State, I said, must not the same
rule prevail? His soul is full of meanness and vulgarity--
the best elements in him are enslaved; and there is a small
ruling part, which is also the worst and maddest.

  Inevitably.

  And would you say that the soul of such a one is the soul
of a freeman or of a slave?

  He has the soul of a slave, in my opinion.

  And the State which is enslaved under a tyrant is utterly
incapable of acting voluntarily?

  Utterly incapable.

  And also the soul which is under a tyrant (I am speaking
of the soul taken as a whole) is least capable of doing what
she desires; there is a gadfly which goads her, and she is
full of trouble and remorse?

  Certainly.

  And is the city which is under a tyrant rich or poor?

  Poor.

  And the tyrannical soul must be always poor and insatiable?

  True.

  And must not such a State and such a man be always full
of fear?

  Yes, indeed.

  Is there any State in which you will find more of lamenta-
tion and sorrow and groaning and pain?

  Certainly not.

  And is there any man in whom you will find more of this
sort of misery than in the tyrannical man, who is in a fury
of passions and desires?

  Impossible.

  Reflecting upon these and similar evils, you held the tyran-
nical State to be the most miserable of States?

  And I was right, he said.

  Certainly, I said. And when you see the same evils in the
tyrannical man, what do you say of him?

  I say that he is by far the most miserable of all men.

  There, I said, I think that you are beginning to go wrong.

  What do you mean?

  I do not think that he has as yet reached the utmost ex-
treme of misery.

  Then who is more miserable?

  One of whom I am about to speak.

  Who is that?

  He who is of a tyrannical nature, and instead of leading a
private life has been cursed with the further misfortune of
being a public tyrant.

  From what has been said, I gather that you are right.

  Yes, I replied, but in this high argument you should be a
little more certain, and should not conjecture only; for of all
questions, this respecting good and evil is the greatest.

  Very true, he said.

  Let me then offer you an illustration, which may, I think,
throw a light upon this subject.

  What is your illustration?

  The case of rich individuals in cities who possess many
slaves: from them you may form an idea of the tyrant's con-
dition, for they both have slaves; the only difference is that
he has more slaves.

  Yes, that is the difference.

  You know that they live securely and have nothing to ap-
prehend from their servants?

  What should they fear?

  Nothing. But do you observe the reason of this?

  Yes; the reason is, that the whole city is leagued together
for the protection of each individual.

  Very true, I said. But imagine one of these owners, the
master say of some fifty slaves, together with his family and
property and slaves, carried off by a god into the wilderness,
where there are no freemen to help him--will he not be in
an agony of fear lest he and his wife and children should be
put to death by his slaves?

  Yes, he said, he will be in the utmost fear.

  The time has arrived when he will be compelled to flatter
divers of his slaves, and make many promises to them of free-
dom and other things, much against his will--he will have
to cajole his own servants.

  Yes, he said, that will be the only way of saving himself.

  And suppose the same god, who carried him away, to sur-
round him with neighbors who will not suffer one man to
be the master of another, and who, if they could catch the
offender, would take his life?

  His case will be still worse, if you suppose him to be every-
where surrounded and watched by enemies.

  And is not this the sort of prison in which the tyrant will
be bound--he who being by nature such as we have described,
is full of all sorts of fears and lusts? His soul is dainty and
greedy, and yet alone, of all men in the city, he is never
allowed to go on a journey, or to see the things which other
freemen desire to see, but he lives in his hole like a woman
hidden in the house, and is jealous of any other citizen who
goes into foreign parts and sees anything of interest.

  Very true, he said.

  And amid evils such as these will not he who is ill-governed
in his own person--the tyrannical man, I mean--whom you
just now decided to be the most miserable of all--will not
he be yet more miserable when, instead of leading a private
life, he is constrained by fortune to be a public tyrant? He
has to be master of others when he is not master of himself:
he is like a diseased or paralytic man who is compelled to pass
his life, not in retirement, but fighting and combating with
other men.

  Yes, he said, the similitude is most exact.

  Is not his case utterly miserable? and does not the actual
tyrant lead a worse life than he whose life you determined to
be the worst?

  Certainly.

  He who is the real tyrant, whatever men may think, is the
real slave, and is obliged to practise the greatest adulation
and servility, and to be the flatterer of the vilest of mankind.
He has desires which he is utterly unable to satisfy, and has
more wants than anyone, and is truly poor, if you know how
to inspect the whole soul of him: all his life long he is beset
with fear and is full of convulsions and distractions, even as
the State which he resembles: and surely the resemblance
holds?

  Very true, he said.

  Moreover, as we were saying before, he grows worse from
having power: he becomes and is of necessity more jealous,
more faithless, more unjust, more friendless, more impious,
than he was at first; he is the purveyor and cherisher of
every sort of vice, and the consequence is that he is supremely
miserable, and that he makes everybody else as miserable as
himself.

  No man of any sense will dispute your words.
Come, then, I said, and as the general umpire in theatrical
contests proclaims the result, do you also decide who in your
opinion is first in the scale of happiness, and who second, and
in what order the others follow: there are five of them in all
--they are the royal, timocratical, oligarchical, democratical,
tyrannical.

  The decision will be easily given, he replied; they shall be
choruses coming on the stage, and I must judge them in the
order in which they enter, by the criterion of virtue and vice,
happiness and misery.

  Need we hire a herald, or shall I announce that the son
of Ariston (the best) has decided that the best and justest
is also the happiest, and that this is he who is the most royal
man and king over himself; and that the worst and most un-
just man is also the most miserable, and that this is he who
being the greatest tyrant of himself is also the greatest tyrant
of his State?

  Make the proclamation yourself, he said.

  And shall I add, "whether seen or unseen by gods and
men"?

  Let the words be added.

  Then this, I said, will be our first proof; and there is an-
other, which may also have some weight.

  What is that?

  The second proof is derived from the nature of the soul:
seeing that the individual soul, like the State, has been di-
vided by us into three principles, the division may, I think,
furnish a new demonstration.

  Of what nature?

  It seems to me that to these three principles three pleasures
correspond; also three desires and governing powers.

  How do you mean? he said.

  There is one principle with which, as we were saying, a
man learns, another with which he is angry; the third, hav-
ing many forms, has no special name, but is denoted by the
general term appetitive, from the extraordinary strength and
vehemence of the desires of eating and drinking and the other
sensual appetites which are the main elements of it; also
money-loving, because such desires are generally satisfied by
the help of money.

  That is true, he said.

  If we were to say that the loves and pleasures of this third
part were concerned with gain, we should then be able to fall
back on a single notion; and might truly and intelligibly de-
scribe this part of the soul as loving gain or money.

  I agree with you.

  Again, is not the passionate element wholly set on ruling
and conquering and getting fame?

  True.

  Suppose we call it the contentious or ambitious--would the
term be suitable?

  Extremely suitable.

  On the other hand, everyone sees that the principle of knowl-
edge is wholly directed to the truth, and cares less than either
of the others for gain or fame.

  Far less.

  "Lover of wisdom," "lover of knowledge," are titles which
we may fitly apply to that part of the soul?

  Certainly.

  One principle prevails in the souls of one class of men, an-
other in others, as may happen?

  Yes.

  Then we may begin by assuming that there are three classes
of men--lovers of wisdom, lovers of honor, lovers of gain?

  Exactly.

  And there are three kinds of pleasure, which are their sev-
eral objects?

  Very true.

  Now, if you examine the three classes of men, and ask of
them in turn which of their lives is pleasantest, each will be
found praising his own and depreciating that of others: the
money-maker will contrast the vanity of honor or of learning
if they bring no money with the solid advantages of gold
and silver?

  True, he said.

  And the lover of honor--what will be his opinion? Will
he not think that the pleasure of riches is vulgar, while the
pleasure of learning, if it brings no distinction, is all smoke
and nonsense to him?

  Very true.

  And are we to suppose, I said, that the philosopher sets
any value on other pleasures in comparison with the pleasure
of knowing the truth, and in that pursuit abiding, ever learn-
ing, not so far indeed from the heaven of pleasure? Does
he not call the other pleasures necessary, under the idea that
if there were no necessity for them, he would rather not have
them?

  There can be no doubt of that, he replied.

  Since, then, the pleasures of each class and the life of each
are in dispute, and the question is not which life is more or
less honorable, or better or worse, but which is the more
pleasant or painless--how shall we know who speaks truly?

  I cannot myself tell, he said.

  Well, but what ought to be the criterion? Is any better
than experience, and wisdom, and reason?

  There cannot be a better, he said.

  Then, I said, reflect. Of the three individuals, which has
the greatest experience of all the pleasures which we enumer-
ated? Has the lover of gain, in learning the nature of essen-
tial truth, greater experience of the pleasure of knowledge
than the philosopher has of the pleasure of gain?

  The philosopher, he replied, has greatly the advantage; for
he has of necessity always known the taste of the other pleas-
ures from his childhood upward: but the lover of gain in all
his experience has not of necessity tasted--or, I should rather
say, even had he desired, could hardly have tasted--the sweet-
ness of learning and knowing truth.

  Then the lover of wisdom has a great advantage over the
lover of gain, for he has a double experience?

  Yes, very great.

  Again, has he greater experience of the pleasures of honor,
or the lover of honor of the pleasures of wisdom?

  Nay, he said, all three are honored in proportion as they
attain their object; for the rich man and the brave man and
the wise man alike have their crowd of admirers, and as they
all receive honor they all have experience of the pleasures of
honor; but the delight which is to be found in the knowledge
of true being is known to the philosopher only.

  His experience, then, will enable him to judge better than
anyone?

  Far better.

  And he is the only one who has wisdom as well as experi-
ence?

  Certainly.

  Further, the very faculty which is the instrument of judg-
ment is not possessed by the covetous or ambitious man, but
only by the philosopher?

  What faculty?

  Reason, with whom, as we were saying, the decision ought
to rest.

  Yes.

  And reasoning is peculiarly his instrument?

  Certainly.

  If wealth and gain were the criterion, then the praise or
blame of the lover of gain would surely be the most trust-
worthy?

  Assuredly.

  Or if honor, or victory, or courage, in that case the judg-
ment of the ambitious or pugnacious would be the truest?

  Clearly.

  But since experience and wisdom and reason are the
judges--

  The only inference possible, he replied, is that pleasures
which are approved by the lover of wisdom and reason are
the truest.

  And so we arrive at the result, that the pleasure of the in-
telligent part of the soul is the pleasantest of the three, and
that he of us in whom this is the ruling principle has the
pleasantest life.

  Unquestionably, he said, the wise man speaks with authority
when he approves of his own life.

  And what does the judge affirm to be the life which is next,
and the pleasure which is next?

  Clearly that of the soldier and lover of honor; who is nearer
to himself than the money-maker.

  Last comes the lover of gain?

  Very true, he said.

  Twice in succession, then, has the just man overthrown the
unjust in this conflict; and now comes the third trial, which
is dedicated to Olympian Zeus the saviour: a sage whispers
in my ear that no pleasure except that of the wise is quite
true and pure--all others are a shadow only; and surely this
will prove the greatest and most decisive of falls?

  Yes, the greatest; but will you explain yourself?

  I will work out the subject and you shall answer my ques-
tions.

  Proceed.

  Say, then, is not pleasure opposed to pain?

  True.

  And there is a neutral state which is neither pleasure nor
pain?

  There is.

  A state which is intermediate, and a sort of repose of the
soul about either--that is what you mean?

  Yes.

  You remember what people say when they are sick?

  What do they say?

  That after all nothing is pleasanter than health. But then
they never knew this to be the greatest of pleasures until they
were ill.

  Yes, I know, he said.

  And when persons are suffering from acute pain, you must
have heard them say that there is nothing pleasanter than to
get rid of their pain?

  I have.

  And there are many other cases of suffering in which the
mere rest and cessation of pain, and not any positive enjoy-
ment, are extolled by them as the greatest pleasure?

  Yes, he said; at the time they are pleased and well content
to be at rest.

  Again, when pleasure ceases, that sort of rest or cessation
will be painful?

  Doubtless, he said.

  Then the intermediate state of rest will be pleasure and will
also be pain?

  So it would seem.

  But can that which is neither become both?

  I should say not.

  And both pleasure and pain are motions of the soul, are
they not?

  Yes.

  But that which is neither was just now shown to be rest
and not motion, and in a mean between them?

  Yes.

  How, then, can we be right in supposing that the absence
of pain is pleasure, or that the absence of pleasure is pain?

  Impossible.
This, then, is an appearance only, and not a reality; that is
to say, the rest is pleasure at the moment and in comparison
of what is painful, and painful in comparison of what is pleas-
ant; but all these representations, when tried by the test of
true pleasure, are not real, but a sort of imposition?

  That is the inference.

  Look at the other class of pleasures which have no ante-
cedent pains and you will no longer suppose, as you perhaps
may at present, that pleasure is only the cessation of pain, or
pain of pleasure.

  What are they, he said, and where shall I find them?

  There are many of them: take as an example, the pleasures
of smell, which are very great and have no antecedent pains;
they come in a moment, and when they depart leave no pain
behind them.

  Most true, he said.

  Let us not, then, be induced to believe that pure pleasure
is the cessation of pain, or pain of pleasure.

  No.

  Still, the more numerous and violent pleasures which reach
the soul through the body are generally of this sort--they are
reliefs of pain.

  That is true.

  And the anticipations of future pleasures and pains are of
a like nature?

  Yes.

  Shall I give you an illustration of them?

  Let me hear.

  You would allow, I said, that there is in nature an upper
and lower and middle region?

  I should.

  And if a person were to go from the lower to the middle
region, would he not imagine that he is going up; and he
who is standing in the middle and sees whence he has come,
would imagine that he is already in the upper region, if he
has never seen the true upper world?

  To be sure, he said; how can he think otherwise?

  But if he were taken back again he would imagine, and truly
imagine, that he was descending?

  No doubt.

  All that would arise out of his ignorance of the true upper
and middle and lower regions?

  Yes.

  Then can you wonder that persons who are inexperienced
in the truth, as they have wrong ideas about many other things,
should also have wrong ideas about pleasure and pain and
the intermediate state; so that when they are only being
drawn toward the painful they feel pain and think the pain
which they experience to be real, and in like manner, when
drawn away from pain to the neutral or intermediate state,
they firmly believe that they have reached the goal of satiety
and pleasure; they, not knowing pleasure, err in contrasting
pain with the absence of pain, which is like contrasting black
with gray instead of white--can you wonder, I say, at this?

  No, indeed; I should be much more disposed to wonder
at the opposite.

  Look at the matter thus: Hunger, thirst, and the like, are
inanitions of the bodily state?

  Yes.

  And ignorance and folly are inanitions of the soul?

  True.

  And food and wisdom are the corresponding satisfactions
of either?

  Certainly.

  And is the satisfaction derived from that which has less or
from that which has more existence the truer?

  Clearly, from that which has more.

  What classes of things have a greater share of pure ex-
istence, in your judgment--those of which food and drink and
condiments and all kinds of sustenance are examples, or the
class which contains true opinion and knowledge and mind
and all the different kinds of virtue? Put the question in this
way: Which has a more pure being--that which is concerned
with the invariable, the immortal, and the true, and is of such
a nature, and is found in such natures; or that which is con-
cerned with and found in the variable and mortal, and is itself
variable and mortal?

  Far purer, he replied, is the being of that which is con-
cerned with the invariable.

  And does the essence of the invariable partake of knowl-
edge in the same degree as of essence?

  Yes, of knowledge in the same degree.

  And of truth in the same degree?

  Yes.

  And, conversely, that which has less of truth will also have
less of essence?

  Necessarily.

  Then, in general, those kinds of things which are in the
service of the body have less of truth and essence than those
which are in the service of the soul?

  Far less.

  And has not the body itself less of truth and essence than
the soul?

  Yes.

  What is filled with more real existence, and actually has a
more real existence, is more really filled than that which is
filled with less real existence and is less real?

  Of course.

  And if there be a pleasure in being filled with that which
is according to nature, that which is more really filled with
more real being will more really and truly enjoy true pleas-
ure; whereas that which participates in less real being will
be less truly and surely satisfied, and will participate in an
illusory and less real pleasure?

  Unquestionably.
Those, then, who know not wisdom and virtue, and are al-
ways busy with gluttony and sensuality, go down and up
again as far as the mean; and in this region they move at
random throughout life, but they never pass into the true
upper world; thither they neither look, nor do they ever find
their way, neither are they truly filled with true being, nor do
they taste of pure and abiding pleasure. Like cattle, with
their eyes always looking down and their heads stooping to
the earth, that is, to the dining-table, they fatten and feed and
breed, and, in their excessive love of these delights, they kick
and butt at one another with horns and hoofs which are made
of iron; and they kill one another by reason of their insatiable
lust. For they fill themselves with that which is not sub-
stantial, and the part of themselves which they fill is also un-
substantial and incontinent.

  Verily, Socrates, said Glaucon, you describe the life of the
many like an oracle.

  Their pleasures are mixed with pains--how can they be
otherwise? For they are mere shadows and pictures of the
true, and are colored by contrast, which exaggerates both light
and shade, and so they implant in the minds of fools insane
desires of themselves; and they are fought about as Stesich-
orus says that the Greeks fought about the shadow of Helen
at Troy, in ignorance of the truth.

  Something of that sort must inevitably happen.

  And must not the like happen with the spirited or passionate
element of the soul? Will not the passionate man who car-
ries his passion into action, be in the like case, whether he is
envious and ambitious, or violent and contentious, or angry
and discontented, if he be seeking to attain honor and victory
and the satisfaction of his anger without reason or sense?

  Yes, he said, the same will happen with the spirited ele-
ment also.

  Then may we not confidently assert that the lovers of money
and honor, when they seek their pleasures under the guidance
and in the company of reason and knowledge, and pursue after
and win the pleasures which wisdom shows them, will also
have the truest pleasures in the highest degree which is attain-
able to them, inasmuch as they follow truth; and they will
have the pleasures which are natural to them, if that which
is best for each one is also most natural to him?

  Yes, certainly; the best is the most natural.

  And when the whole soul follows the philosophical prin-
ciple, and there is no division, the several parts are just, and
do each of them their own business, and enjoy severally the
best and truest pleasures of which they are capable?

  Exactly.

  But when either of the two other principles prevails, it fails
in attaining its own pleasure, and compels the rest to pursue
after a pleasure which is a shadow only and which is not their
own?

  True.

  And the greater the interval which separates them from
philosophy and reason, the more strange and illusive will be
the pleasure?

  Yes.

  And is not that farthest from reason which is at the greatest
distance from law and order?

  Clearly.

  And the lustful and tyrannical desires are, as we saw, at
the greatest distance?
Yes.

  And the royal and orderly desires are nearest?

  Yes.

  Then the tyrant will live at the greatest distance from true
or natural pleasure, and the king at the least?

  Certainly.

  But if so, the tyrant will live most unpleasantly, and the
king most pleasantly?

  Inevitably.

  Would you know the measure of the interval which sepa-
rates them?

  Will you tell me?

  There appear to be three pleasures, one genuine and two
spurious: now the transgression of the tyrant reaches a point
beyond the spurious; he has run away from the region of
law and reason, and taken up his abode with certain slave
pleasures which are his satellites, and the measure of his in-
feriority can only be expressed in a figure.

  How do you mean?

  I assume, I said, that the tyrant is in the third place from
the oligarch; the democrat was in the middle?

  Yes.

  And if there is truth in what has preceded, he will be
wedded to an image of pleasure which is thrice removed as
to truth from the pleasure of the oligarch?

  He will.

  And the oligarch is third from the royal; since we count
as one royal and aristocratical?

  Yes, he is third.

  Then the tyrant is removed from true pleasure by the space
of a number which is three times three?

  Manifestly.

  The shadow, then, of tyrannical pleasure determined by the
number of length will be a plane figure.

  Certainly.

  And if you raise the power and make the plane a solid, there
is no difficulty in seeing how vast is the interval by which
the tyrant is parted from the king.

  Yes; the arithmetician will easily do the sum.

  Or if some person begins at the other end and measures
the interval by which the king is parted from the tyrant in
truth of pleasure, he will find him, when the multiplication is
completed, living 729 times more pleasantly, and the tyrant
more painfully by this same interval.

  What a wonderful calculation! And how enormous is the
distance which separates the just from the unjust in regard to
pleasure and pain!

  Yet a true calculation, I said, and a number which nearly
concerns human life, if human beings are concerned with days
and nights and months and years.

  Yes, he said, human life is certainly concerned with them.

  Then if the good and just man be thus superior in pleasure
to the evil and unjust, his superiority will be infinitely greater
in propriety of life and in beauty and virtue?

  Immeasurably greater.

  Well, I said, and now having arrived at this stage of the
argument, we may revert to the words which brought us
hither: Was not someone saying that injustice was a gain
to the perfectly unjust who was reputed to be just?

  Yes, that was said.
Now, then, having determined the power and quality of
justice and injustice, let us have a little conversation with him.

  What shall we say to him?

  Let us make an image of the soul, that he may have his
own words presented before his eyes.

  Of what sort?

  An ideal image of the soul, like the composite creations of
ancient mythology, such as the Chimera, or Scylla, or Cerberus,
and there are many others in which two or more different
natures are said to grow into one.

  There are said to have been such unions.

  Then do you now model the form of a multitudinous, many-
headed monster, having a ring of heads of all manner of
beasts, tame and wild, which he is able to generate and meta-
morphose at will.

  You suppose marvellous powers in the artist; but, as lan-
guage is more pliable than wax or any similar substance, let
there be such a model as you propose.

  Suppose now that you make a second form as of a lion, and
a third of a man, the second smaller than the first, and the
third smaller than the second.

  That, he said, is an easier task; and I have made them as
you say.

  And now join them, and let the three grow into one.

  That has been accomplished.

  Next fashion the outside of them into a single image, as of
a man, so that he who is not able to look within, and sees only
the outer hull, may believe the beast to be a single human
creature.
I have done so, he said.

  And now, to him who maintains that it is profitable for the
human creature to be unjust, and unprofitable to be just, let
us reply that, if he be right, it is profitable for this creature
to feast the multitudinous monster and strengthen the lion and
the lion-like qualities, but to starve and weaken the man, who
is consequently liable to be dragged about at the mercy of
either of the other two; and he is not to attempt to familiarize
or harmonize them with one another--he ought rather to suf-
fer them to fight, and bite and devour one another.

  Certainly, he said; that is what the approver of injustice
says.

  To him the supporter of justice makes answer that he
should ever so speak and act as to give the man within him
in some way or other the most complete mastery over the
entire human creature.

  He should watch over the many-
headed monster like a good husbandman, fostering and culti-
vating the gentle qualities, and preventing the wild ones from
growing; he should be making the lion-heart his ally, and in
common care of them all should be uniting the several parts
with one another and with himself.

  Yes, he said, that is quite what the maintainer of justice
will say.

  And so from every point of view, whether of pleasure,
honor, or advantage, the approver of justice is right and
speaks the truth, and the disapprover is wrong and false and
ignorant?

  Yes, from every point of view.

  Come, now, and let us gently reason with the unjust, who
is not intentionally in error. "Sweet sir," we will say to him,
"what think you of things esteemed noble and ignoble? Is
not the noble that which subjects the beast to the man, or
rather to the god in man? and the ignoble that which sub-
jects the man to the beast?" He can hardly avoid saying,
Yes--can he, now?
Not if he has any regard for my opinion.
But, if he agree so far, we may ask him to answer another
question: "Then how would a man profit if he received gold
and silver on the condition that he was to enslave the noblest
part of him to the worst? Who can imagine that a man who
sold his son or daughter into slavery for money, especially if
he sold them into the hands of fierce and evil men, would be
the gainer, however large might be the sum which he re-
ceived? And will anyone say that he is not a miserable
caitiff who remorselessly sells his own divine being to that
which is most godless and detestable? Eriphyle took the
necklace as the price of her husband's life, but he is taking a
bribe in order to compass a worse ruin."

  Yes, said Glaucon, far worse--I will answer for him.

  Has not the intemperate been censured of old, because in
him the huge multiform monster is allowed to be too much at
large?

  Clearly.

  And men are blamed for pride and bad temper when the
lion and serpent element in them disproportionately grows and
gains strength?

  Yes.

  And luxury and softness are blamed, because they relax
and weaken this same creature, and make a coward of him?

  Very true.

  And is not a man reproached for flattery and meanness who
subordinates the spirited animal to the unruly monster, and,
for the sake of money, of which he can never have enough,
habituates him in the days of his youth to be trampled in the
mire, and from being a lion to become a monkey?

  True, he said.

  And why are mean employments and manual arts a re-
proach? Only because they imply a natural weakness of the
higher principle; the individual is unable to control the creat-
ures within him, but has to court them, and his great study
is how to flatter them.

  Such appears to be the reason.

  And therefore, being desirous of placing him under a rule
like that of the best, we say that he ought to be the servant
of the best, in whom the Divine rules; not, as Thrasymachus
supposed, to the injury of the servant, but because everyone
had better be ruled by divine wisdom dwelling within him;
or, if this be impossible, then by an external authority, in
order that we may be all, as far as possible, under the same
government, friends and equals.

  True, he said.

  And this is clearly seen to be the intention of the law, which
is the ally of the whole city; and is seen also in the authority
which we exercise over children, and the refusal to let them
be free until we have established in them a principle analogous
to the constitution of a State, and by cultivation of this higher
element have set up in their hearts a guardian and ruler like
our own, and when this is done they may go their ways.

  Yes, he said, the purpose of the law is manifest.

  From what point of view, then, and on what ground can
we say that a man is profited by injustice or intemperance or
other baseness, which will make him a worse man, even
though he acquire money or power by his wickedness?

  From no point of view at all.

  What shall he profit, if his injustice be undetected and un-
punished? He who is undetected only gets worse, whereas
he who is detected and punished has the brutal part of his
nature silenced and humanized; the gentler element in him
is liberated, and his whole soul is perfected and ennobled by
the acquirement of justice and temperance and wisdom, more
than the body ever is by receiving gifts of beauty, strength,
and health, in proportion as the soul is more honorable than
the body.

  Certainly, he said.

  To this nobler purpose the man of understanding will devote
the energies of his life. And in the first place, he will honor
studies which impress these qualities on his soul, and will dis-
regard others?

  Clearly, he said.

  In the next place, he will regulate his bodily habit and train-
ing, and so far will he be from yielding to brutal and irrational
pleasures, that he will regard even health as quite a secondary
matter; his first object will be not that he may be fair or strong
or well, unless he is likely thereby to gain temperance, but he
will always desire so to attemper the body as to preserve the
harmony of the soul?

  Certainly he will, if he has true music in him.

  And in the acquisition of wealth there is a principle of order
and harmony which he will also observe; he will not allow him-
self to be dazzled by the foolish applause of the world, and heap
up riches to his own infinite harm?

  Certainly not, he said.

  He will look at the city which is within him, and take heed
that no disorder occur in it, such as might arise either from
superfluity or from want; and upon this principle he will regu-
late his property and gain or spend according to his means.

  Very true.

  And, for the same reason, he will gladly accept and enjoy
such honors as he deems likely to make him a better man; but
those, whether private or public, which are likely to disorder
his life, he will avoid?

  Then, if that is his motive, he will not be a statesman.

  By the dog of Egypt, he will! in the city which is his own
he certainly will, though in the land of his birth perhaps not,
unless he have a divine call.

  I understand; you mean that he will be a ruler in the city
of which we are the founders, and which exists in idea only;
for I do not believe that there is such a one anywhere on earth?

  In heaven, I replied, there is laid up a pattern of it, methinks,
which he who desires may behold, and beholding, may set his
own house in order. But whether such a one exists, or ever
will exist in fact, is no matter; for he will live after the manner
of that city, having nothing to do with any other.

  I think so, he said.


                           BOOK X
                    THE RECOMPENSE OF LIFE

(SOCRATES, GLAUCON.)

  OF the many excellences which I perceive in the order of
our State, there is none which upon reflection pleases
me better than the rule about poetry.

  To what do you refer?

  To the rejection of imitative poetry, which certainly ought
not to be received; as I see far more clearly now that the parts
of the soul have been distinguished.

  What do you mean?

  Speaking in confidence, for I should not like to have my
words repeated to the tragedians and the rest of the imitative
tribe--but I do not mind saying to you, that all poetical imita-
tions are ruinous to the understanding of the hearers, and that
the knowledge of their true nature is the only antidote to them.

  Explain the purport of your remark.

  Well, I will tell you, although I have always from my earliest
youth had an awe and love of Homer, which even now makes
the words falter on my lips, for he is the great captain and
teacher of the whole of that charming tragic company; but a
man is not to be reverenced more than the truth, and therefore
I will speak out.

  Very good, he said.

  Listen to me, then, or, rather, answer me.

  Put your question.

  Can you tell me what imitation is? for I really do not know.

  A likely thing, then, that I should know.

  Why not? for the duller eye may often see a thing sooner
than the keener.

  Very true, he said; but in your presence, even if I had any
faint notion, I could not muster courage to utter it. Will you
inquire yourself?
Well, then, shall we begin the inquiry in our usual manner:
Whenever a number of individuals have a common name, we
assume them to have also a corresponding idea or form; do you
understand me?

  I do.

  Let us take any common instance; there are beds and tables
in the world--plenty of them, are there not?

  Yes.

  But there are only two ideas or forms of them--one the idea
of a bed, the other of a table.

  True.

  And the maker of either of them makes a bed or he makes
a table for our use, in accordance with the idea--that is our
way of speaking in this and similar instances--but no artificer
makes the ideas themselves: how could he?

  Impossible.

  And there is another artist--I should like to know what you
would say of him.

  Who is he?

  One who is the maker of all the works of all other workmen.

  What an extraordinary man!

  Wait a little, and there will be more reason for your saying
so. For this is he who is able to make not only vessels of every
kind, but plants and animals, himself and all other things--
the earth and heaven, and the things which are in heaven or
under the earth; he makes the gods also.

  He must be a wizard and no mistake.

  Oh! you are incredulous, are you? Do you mean that there
is no such maker or creator, or that in one sense there might
be a maker of all these things, but in another not? Do you see
that there is a way in which you could make them all yourself?

  What way?

  An easy way enough; or rather, there are many ways in
which the feat might be quickly and easily accomplished, none
quicker than that of turning a mirror round and round--you
would soon enough make the sun and the heavens, and the
earth and yourself, and other animals and plants, and all the
other things of which we were just now speaking, in the mirror.

  Yes, he said; but they would be appearances only.

  Very good, I said, you are coming to the point now. And
the painter, too, is, as I conceive, just such another--a creator
of appearances, is he not?

  Of course.

  But then I suppose you will say that what he creates is un-
true. And yet there is a sense in which the painter also creates
a bed?

  Yes, he said, but not a real bed.

  And what of the maker of the bed? were you not saying that
he too makes, not the idea which, according to our view, is the
essence of the bed, but only a particular bed?

  Yes, I did.

  Then if he does not make that which exists he cannot make
true existence, but only some semblance of existence; and if
anyone were to say that the work of the maker of the bed, or
of any other workman, has real existence, he could hardly be
supposed to be speaking the truth.

  At any rate, he replied, philosophers would say that he was
not speaking the truth.

  No wonder, then, that his work, too, is an indistinct expres-
sion of truth.

  No wonder.

  Suppose now that by the light of the examples just offered
we inquire who this imitator is?

  If you please.
Well, then, here are three beds: one existing in nature, which
is made by God, as I think that we may say--for no one else
can be the maker?

  No.

  There is another which is the work of the carpenter?

  Yes.

  And the work of the painter is a third?

  Yes.

  Beds, then, are of three kinds, and there are three artists who
superintend them: God, the maker of the bed, and the painter?

  Yes, there are three of them.

  God, whether from choice or from necessity, made one bed
in nature and one only; two or more such ideal beds neither
ever have been nor ever will be made by God.

  Why is that?

  Because even if He had made but two, a third would still
appear behind them which both of them would have for their
idea, and that would be the ideal bed and not the two others.

  Very true, he said.

  God knew this, and he desired to be the real maker of a real
bed, not a particular maker of a particular bed, and therefore
he created a bed which is essentially and by nature one only.

  So we believe.

  Shall we, then, speak of him as the natural author or maker
of the bed?

  Yes, he replied; inasmuch as by the natural process of crea-
tion he is the author of this and of all other things.

  And what shall we say of the carpenter--is not he also the
maker of the bed?

  Yes.

  But would you call the painter a creator and maker?

  Certainly not.

  Yet if he is not the maker, what is he in relation to the bed?

  I think, he said, that we may fairly designate him as the
imitator of that which the others make.

  Good, I said; then you call him who is third in the descent
from nature an imitator?

  Certainly, he said.

  And the tragic poet is an imitator, and, therefore, like all
other imitators, he is thrice removed from the king and from
the truth?

  That appears to be so.

  Then about the imitator we are agreed. And what about
the painter? I would like to know whether he may be thought
to imitate that which originally exists in nature, or only the
creations of artists?

  The latter.

  As they are or as they appear? you have still to determine
this.

  What do you mean?

  I mean, that you may look at a bed from different points of
view, obliquely or directly or from any other point of view, and
the bed will appear different, but there is no difference in reality.
And the same of all things.

  Yes, he said, the difference is only apparent.

  Now let me ask you another question: Which is the art of
painting designed to be--an imitation of things as they are, or
as they appear--of appearance or of reality?

  Of appearance.

  Then the imitator, I said, is a long way off the truth, and
can do all things because he lightly touches on a small part of
them, and that part an image. For example: A painter will
paint a cobbler, carpenter, or any other artist, though he knows
nothing of their arts; and, if he is a good artist, he may deceive
children or simple persons, when he shows them his picture of
a carpenter from a distance, and they will fancy that they are
looking at a real carpenter.

  Certainly.

  And whenever anyone informs us that he has found a man
who knows all the arts, and all things else that anybody knows,
and every single thing with a higher degree of accuracy than
any other man--whoever tells us this, I think that we can only
imagine him to be a simple creature who is likely to have been
deceived by some wizard or actor whom he met, and whom he
thought all-knowing, because he himself was unable to analyze
the nature of knowledge and ignorance and imitation.

  Most true.

  And so, when we hear persons saying that the tragedians,
and Homer, who is at their head, know all the arts and all
things human, virtue as well as vice, and divine things too, for
that the good poet cannot compose well unless he knows his
subject, and that he who has not this knowledge can never be
a poet, we ought to consider whether here also there may not
be a similar illusion. Perhaps they may have come across imi-
tators and been deceived by them; they may not have remem-
bered when they saw their works that these were but imitations
thrice removed from the truth, and could easily be made with-
out any knowledge of the truth, because they are appearances
only and not realities? Or, after all, they may be in the right,
and poets do really know the things about which they seem to
the many to speak so well?

  The question, he said, should by all means be considered.

  Now do you suppose that if a person were able to make the
original as well as the image, he would seriously devote himself
to the image-making branch? Would he allow imitation to be
the ruling principle of his life, as if he had nothing higher in
him?

  I should say not.

  The real artist, who knew what he was imitating, would be
interested in realities and not in imitations; and would desire
to leave as memorials of himself works many and fair; and,
instead of being the author of encomiums, he would prefer to
be the theme of them.

  Yes, he said, that would be to him a source of much greater
honor and profit.

  Then, I said, we must put a question to Homer; not about
medicine, or any of the arts to which his poems only incidentally
refer: we are not going to ask him, or any other poet, whether
he has cured patients like Asclepius, or left behind him a school
of medicine such as the Asclepiads were, or whether he only
talks about medicine and other arts at second-hand; but we
have a right to know respecting military tactics, politics, edu-
cation, which are the chiefest and noblest subjects of his poems,
and we may fairly ask him about them. "Friend Homer,"
then we say to him, "if you are only in the second remove from
truth in what you say of virtue, and not in the third--not an
image maker or imitator--and if you are able to discern what
pursuits make men better or worse in private or public life, tell
us what State was ever better governed by your help? The
good order of Lacedaemon is due to Lycurgus, and many other
cities, great and small, have been similarly benefited by others;
but who says that you have been a good legislator to them and
have done them any good? Italy and Sicily boast of Charon-
das, and there is Solon who is renowned among us; but what
city has anything to say about you?" Is there any city which
he might name?

  I think not, said Glaucon; not even the Homerids themselves
pretend that he was a legislator.

  Well, but is there any war on record which was carried on
successfully by him, or aided by his counsels, when he was
alive?

  There is not.

  Or is there any invention of his, applicable to the arts or to
human life, such as Thales the Milesian or Anacharsis the
Scythian, and other ingenious men have conceived, which is
attributed to him?

  There is absolutely nothing of the kind.

  But, if Homer never did any public service, was he privately
a guide or teacher of any? Had he in his lifetime friends who
loved to associate with him, and who handed down to posterity
a Homeric way of life, such as was established by Pythagoras,
who was so greatly beloved for his wisdom, and whose fol-
lowers are to this day quite celebrated for the order which was
named after him?

  Nothing of the kind is recorded of him. For, surely, Soc-
rates, Creophylus, the companion of Homer, that child of
flesh, whose name always makes us laugh, might be more justly
ridiculed for his stupidity, if, as is said, Homer was greatly
neglected by him and others in his own day when he was alive?

  Yes, I replied, that is the tradition. But can you imagine,
Glaucon, that if Homer had really been able to educate and im-
prove mankind--if he had possessed knowledge, and not been a
mere imitator--can you imagine, I say, that he would not have
had many followers, and been honored and loved by them?
Protagoras of Abdera and Prodicus of Ceos and a host of
others have only to whisper to their contemporaries: "You
will never be able to manage either your own house or your
own State until you appoint us to be your ministers of educa-
tion"--and this ingenious device of theirs has such an effect
in making men love them that their companions all but carry
them about on their shoulders. And is it conceivable that the
contemporaries of Homer, or again of Hesiod, would have al-
lowed either of them to go about as rhapsodists, if they had
really been able to make mankind virtuous? Would they not
have been as unwilling to part with them as with gold, and have
compelled them to stay at home with them? Or, if the master
would not stay, then the disciples would have followed him
about everywhere, until they had got education enough?

  Yes, Socrates, that, I think, is quite true.

  Then must we not infer that all these poetical individuals,
beginning with Homer, are only imitators; they copy images
of virtue and the like, but the truth they never reach? The
poet is like a painter who, as we have already observed, will
make a likeness of a cobbler though he understands nothing of
cobbling; and his picture is good enough for those who know
no more than he does, and judge only by colors and figures.

  Quite so.

  In like manner the poet with his words and phrases may
be said to lay on the colors of the several arts, himself under-
standing their nature only enough to imitate them; and other
people, who are as ignorant as he is, and judge only from his
words, imagine that if he speaks of cobbling, or of military tac-
tics, or of anything else, in metre and harmony and rhythm, he
speaks very well--such is the sweet influence which melody
and rhythm by nature have. And I think that you must have
observed again and again what a poor appearance the tales of
poets make when stripped of the colors which music puts upon
them, and recited in simple prose.

  Yes, he said.

  They are like faces which were never really beautiful, but
only blooming; and now the bloom of youth has passed away
from them?

  Exactly.

  Here is another point: The imitator or maker of the image
knows nothing of true existence; he knows appearances only.
Am I not right?

  Yes.

  Then let us have a clear understanding, and not be satisfied
with half an explanation.

  Proceed.

  Of the painter we say that he will paint reins, and he will
paint a bit?

  Yes.

  And the worker in leather and brass will make them?

  Certainly.

  But does the painter know the right form of the bit and reins?
Nay, hardly even the workers in brass and leather who make
them; only the horseman who knows how to use them--he
knows their right form.

  Most true.

  And may we not say the same of all things?

  What?

  That there are three arts which are concerned with all things:
one which uses, another which makes, a third which imitates
them?

  Yes.

  And the excellence or beauty or truth of every structure,
animate or inanimate, and of every action of man, is relative
to the use for which nature or the artist has intended them.

  True.

  Then the user of them must have the greatest experience of
them, and he must indicate to the maker the good or bad quali-
ties which develop themselves in use; for example, the flute-
player will tell the flute-maker which of his flutes is satisfactory
to the performer; he will tell him how he ought to make them,
and the other will attend to his instructions?

  Of course.

  The one knows and therefore speaks with authority about
the goodness and badness of flutes, while the other, confiding
in him, will do what he is told by him?

  True.

  The instrument is the same, but about the excellence or bad-
ness of it the maker will only attain to a correct belief; and this
he will gain from him who knows, by talking to him and being
compelled to hear what he has to say, whereas the user will
have knowledge?

  True.

  But will the imitator have either? Will he know from use
whether or no his drawing is correct or beautiful? or will he
have right opinion from being compelled to associate with an-
other who knows and gives him instructions about what he
should draw?

  Neither.

  Then he will no more have true opinion than he will have
knowledge about the goodness or badness of his imitations?

  I suppose not.

  The imitative artist will be in a brilliant state of intelligence
about his own creations?

  Nay, very much the reverse.

  And still he will go on imitating without knowing what
makes a thing good or bad, and may be expected therefore to
imitate only that which appears to be good to the ignorant
multitude?

  Just so.

  Thus far, then, we are pretty well agreed that the imitator
has no knowledge worth mentioning of what he imitates. Im-
itation is only a kind of play or sport, and the tragic poets,
whether they write in iambic or in heroic verse, are imitators
in the highest degree?

  Very true.

  And now tell me, I conjure you, has not imitation been shown
by us to be concerned with that which is thrice removed from
the truth?

  Certainly.

  And what is the faculty in man to which imitation is ad-
dressed?

  What do you mean?

  I will explain: The body which is large when seen near, ap-
pears small when seen at a distance?

  True.

  And the same objects appear straight when looked at out
of the water, and crooked when in the water; and the concave
becomes convex, owing to the illusion about colors to which
the sight is liable. Thus every sort of confusion is revealed
within us; and this is that weakness of the human mind on
which the art of conjuring and of deceiving by light and
shadow and other ingenious devices imposes, having an effect
upon us like magic.

  True.

  And the arts of measuring and numbering and weighing
come to the rescue of the human understanding--there is the
beauty of them--and the apparent greater or less, or more or
heavier, no longer have the mastery over us, but give way be-
fore calculation and measure and weight?

  Most true.

  And this, surely, must be the work of the calculating and
rational principle in the soul?

  To be sure.

  And when this principle measures and certifies that some
things are equal, or that some are greater or less than others,
there occurs an apparent contradiction?

  True.

  But were we not saying that such a contradiction is impos-
sible--the same faculty cannot have contrary opinions at the
same time about the same thing?

  Very true.

  Then that part of the soul which has an opinion contrary to
measure is not the same with that which has an opinion in ac-
cordance with measure?

  True.

  And the better part of the soul is likely to be that which
trusts to measure and calculation?

  Certainly.

  And that which is opposed to them is one of the inferior
principles of the soul?

  No doubt.

  This was the conclusion at which I was seeking to arrive
when I said that painting or drawing, and imitation in general,
when doing their own proper work, are far removed from truth,
and the companions and friends and associates of a principle
within us which is equally removed from reason, and that they
have no true or healthy aim.

  Exactly.

  The imitative art is an inferior who marries an inferior, and
has inferior offspring.

  Very true.

  And is this confined to the sight only, or does it extend to
the hearing also, relating in fact to what we term poetry?

  Probably the same would be true of poetry.

  Do not rely, I said, on a probability derived from the analogy
of painting; but let us examine further and see whether the
faculty with which poetical imitation is concerned is good or
bad.

  By all means.

  We may state the question thus: Imitation imitates the ac-
tions of men, whether voluntary or involuntary, on which, as
they imagine, a good or bad result has ensued, and they rejoice
or sorrow accordingly. Is there anything more?

  No, there is nothing else.

  But in all this variety of circumstances is the man at unity
with himself--or, rather, as in the instance of sight there were
confusion and opposition in his opinions about the same things,
so here also are there not strife and inconsistency in his life?
though I need hardly raise the question again, for I remember
that all this has been already admitted; and the soul has been
acknowledged by us to be full of these and ten thousand similar
oppositions occurring at the same moment?

  And we were right, he said.

  Yes, I said, thus far we were right; but there was an omis-
sion which must now be supplied.

  What was the omission?

  Were we not saying that a good man, who has the misfortune
to lose his son or anything else which is most dear to him,
will bear the loss with more equanimity than another?

  Yes.

  But will he have no sorrow, or shall we say that although
he cannot help sorrowing, he will moderate his sorrow?

  The latter, he said, is the truer statement.

  Tell me: will he be more likely to struggle and hold out
against his sorrow when he is seen by his equals, or when he is
alone?

  It will make a great difference whether he is seen or not.

  When he is by himself he will not mind saying or doing many
things which he would be ashamed of anyone hearing or seeing
him do?

  True.

  There is a principle of law and reason in him which bids him
resist, as well as a feeling of his misfortune which is forcing
him to indulge his sorrow?

  True.

  But when a man is drawn in two opposite directions, to and
from the same object, this, as we affirm, necessarily implies two
distinct principles in him?

  Certainly.

  One of them is ready to follow the guidance of the law?

  How do you mean?

  The law would say that to be patient under suffering is best,
and that we should not give way to impatience, as there is no
knowing whether such things are good or evil; and nothing is
gained by impatience; also, because no human thing is of seri-
ous importance, and grief stands in the way of that which at
the moment is most required.

  What is most required? he asked.

  That we should take counsel about what has happened, and
when the dice have been thrown order our affairs in the way
which reason deems best; not, like children who have had a
fall, keeping hold of the part struck and wasting time in setting
up a howl, but always accustoming the soul forthwith to apply
a remedy, raising up that which is sickly and fallen, banishing
the cry of sorrow by the healing art.

  Yes, he said, that is the true way of meeting the attacks of
fortune.

  Yes, I said; and the higher principle is ready to follow this
suggestion of reason?

  Clearly.

  And the other principle, which inclines us to recollection of
our troubles and to lamentation, and can never have enough of
them, we may call irrational, useless, and cowardly?

  Indeed, we may.

  And does not the latter--I mean the rebellious principle--
furnish a great variety of materials for imitation? Whereas
the wise and calm temperament, being always nearly equable,
is not easy to imitate or to appreciate when imitated, especially
at a public festival when a promiscuous crowd is assembled in a
theatre. For the feeling represented is one to which they are
strangers.

  Certainly.

  Then the imitative poet who aims at being popular is not by
nature made, nor is his art intended, to please or to affect the
rational principle in the soul; but he will prefer the passionate
and fitful temper, which is easily imitated?

  Clearly.

  And now we may fairly take him and place him by the side
of the painter, for he is like him in two ways: first, inasmuch
as his creations have an inferior degree of truth--in this, I say,
he is like him; and he is also like him in being concerned with
an inferior part of the soul; and therefore we shall be right in
refusing to admit him into a well-ordered State, because he
awakens and nourishes and strengthens the feelings and im-
pairs the reason. As in a city when the evil are permitted to
have authority and the good are put out of the way, so in the
soul of man, as we maintain, the imitative poet implants an evil
constitution, for he indulges the irrational nature which has no
discernment of greater and less, but thinks the same thing at
one time great and at another small--he is a manufacturer of
images and is very far removed from the truth.

  Exactly.

  But we have not yet brought forward the heaviest count in
our accusation: the power which poetry has of harming even
the good (and there are very few who are not harmed), is
surely an awful thing?

  Yes, certainly, if the effect is what you say.

  Hear and judge: The best of us, as I conceive, when we
listen to a passage of Homer or one of the tragedians, in which
he represents some pitiful hero who is drawling out his sorrows
in a long oration, or weeping, and smiting his breast--the best
of us, you know, delight in giving way to sympathy, and are in
raptures at the excellence of the poet who stirs our feelings
most.

  Yes, of course, I know.

  But when any sorrow of our own happens to us, then you
may observe that we pride ourselves on the opposite quality--
we would fain be quiet and patient; this is the manly part, and
the other which delighted us in the recitation is now deemed
to be the part of a woman.

  Very true, he said.

  Now can we be right in praising and admiring another who
is doing that which any one of us would abominate and be
ashamed of in his own person?

  No, he said, that is certainly not reasonable.

  Nay, I said, quite reasonable from one point of view.

  What point of view?

  If you consider, I said, that when in misfortune we feel a
natural hunger and desire to relieve our sorrow by weeping
and lamentation, and that this feeling which is kept under con-
trol in our own calamities is satisfied and delighted by the
poets; the better nature in each of us, not having been suffi-
ciently trained by reason or habit, allows the sympathetic ele-
ment to break loose because the sorrow is another's; and the
spectator fancies that there can be no disgrace to himself in
praising and pitying anyone who comes telling him what a good
man he is, and making a fuss about his troubles; he thinks
that the pleasure is a gain, and why should he be supercilious
and lose this and the poem too? Few persons ever reflect, as I
should imagine, that from the evil of other men something of
evil is communicated to themselves. And so the feeling of sor-
row which has gathered strength at the sight of the misfortunes
of others is with difficulty repressed in our own.

  How very true!

  And does not the same hold also of the ridiculous? There
are jests which you would be ashamed to make yourself, and
yet on the comic stage, or indeed in private, when you hear
them, you are greatly amused by them, and are not at all dis-
gusted at their unseemliness; the case of pity is repeated; there
is a principle in human nature which is disposed to raise a
laugh, and this which you once restrained by reason, because
you were afraid of being thought a buffoon, is now let out
again; and having stimulated the risible faculty at the theatre,
you are betrayed unconsciously to yourself into playing the
comic poet at home.

  Quite true, he said.

  And the same may be said of lust and anger and all the other
affections, of desire, and pain, and pleasure, which are held to
be inseparable from every action--in all of them poetry feeds
and waters the passions instead of drying them up; she lets
them rule, although they ought to be controlled, if mankind are
ever to increase in happiness and virtue.

  I cannot deny it.

  Therefore, Glaucon, I said, whenever you meet with any of
the eulogists of Homer declaring that he has been the educator
of Hellas, and that he is profitable for education and for the
ordering of human things, and that you should take him up
again and again and get to know him and regulate your whole
life according to him, we may love and honor those who say
these things--they are excellent people, as far as their lights
extend; and we are ready to acknowledge that Homer is the
greatest of poets and first of tragedy writers; but we must re-
main firm in our conviction that hymns to the gods and praises
of famous men are the only poetry which ought to be admitted
into our State. For if you go beyond this and allow the
honeyed muse to enter, either in epic or lyric verse, not law and
the reason of mankind, which by common consent have ever
been deemed best, but pleasure and pain will be the rulers in
our State.

  That is most true, he said.

  And now since we have reverted to the subject of poetry, let
this our defence serve to show the reasonableness of our former
judgment in sending away out of our State an art having the
tendencies which we have described; for reason constrained us.
But that she may not impute to us any harshness or want of
politeness, let us tell her that there is an ancient quarrel between
philosophy and poetry; of which there are many proofs, such
as the saying of "the yelping hound howling at her lord," or
of one "mighty in the vain talk of fools," and "the mob of
sages circumventing Zeus," and the "subtle thinkers who are
beggars after all"; and there are innumerable other signs of
ancient enmity between them. Notwithstanding this, let us
assure our sweet friend and the sister art of imitation, that if
she will only prove her title to exist in a well-ordered State we
shall be delighted to receive her--we are very conscious of her
charms; but we may not on that account betray the truth. I
dare say, Glaucon, that you are as much charmed by her as I
am, especially when she appears in Homer?

  Yes, indeed, I am greatly charmed.

  Shall I propose, then, that she be allowed to return from
exile, but upon this condition only--that she make a defence
of herself in lyrical or some other metre?

  Certainly.

  And we may further grant to those of her defenders who are
lovers of poetry and yet not poets the permission to speak in
prose on her behalf: let them show not only that she is pleasant,
but also useful to States and to human life, and we will listen
in a kindly spirit; for if this can be proved we shall surely be
the gainers--I mean, if there is a use in poetry as well as a
delight?

  Certainly, he said, we shall be the gainers.

  If her defence fails, then, my dear friend, like other persons
who are enamoured of something, but put a restraint upon
themselves when they think their desires are opposed to their
interests, so, too, must we after the manner of lovers give her
up, though not without a struggle. We, too, are inspired by
that love of poetry which the education of noble States has im-
planted in us, and therefore we would have her appear at her
best and truest; but so long as she is unable to make good her
defence, this argument of ours shall be a charm to us, which
we will repeat to ourselves while we listen to her strains; that
we may not fall away into the childish love of her which capti-
vates the many. At all events we are well aware that poetry
being such as we have described is not to be regarded seriously
as attaining to the truth; and he who listens to her, fearing for
the safety of the city which is within him, should be on his
guard against her seductions and make our words his law.

  Yes, he said, I quite agree with you.

  Yes, I said, my dear Glaucon, for great is the issue at stake,
greater than appears, whether a man is to be good or bad. And
what will anyone be profited if under the influence of honor or
money or power, aye, or under the excitement of poetry, he
neglect justice and virtue?

  Yes, he said; I have been convinced by the argument, as I
believe that anyone else would have been.

  And yet no mention has been made of the greatest prizes and
rewards which await virtue.

  What, are there any greater still? If there are, they must
be of an inconceivable greatness.

  Why, I said, what was ever great in a short time? The
whole period of threescore years and ten is surely but a little
thing in comparison with eternity?

  Say rather 'nothing' he replied.

  And should an immortal being seriously think of this little
space rather than of the whole?

  Of the whole, certainly. But why do you ask?

  Are you not aware, I said, that the soul of man is immortal
and imperishable?

  He looked at me in astonishment, and said: No, by heaven:
And are you really prepared to maintain this?

  Yes, I said, I ought to be, and you too--there is no difficulty
in proving it.

  I see a great difficulty; but I should like to hear you state
this argument of which you make so light.
Listen, then.

  I am attending.

  There is a thing which you call good and another which you
call evil?

  Yes, he replied.

  Would you agree with me in thinking that the corrupting
and destroying element is the evil, and the saving and improv-
ing element the good?

  Yes.

  And you admit that everything has a good and also an evil;
as ophthalmia is the evil of the eyes and disease of the whole
body; as mildew is of corn, and rot of timber, or rust of copper
and iron: in everything, or in almost everything, there is an in-
herent evil and disease?

  Yes, he said.

  And anything which is infected by any of these evils is made
evil, and at last wholly dissolves and dies?

  True.

  The vice and evil which are inherent in each are the destruc-
tion of each; and if these do not destroy them there is nothing
else that will; for good certainly will not destroy them, nor,
again, that which is neither good nor evil.

  Certainly not.

  If, then, we find any nature which having this inherent cor-
ruption cannot be dissolved or destroyed, we may be certain
that of such a nature there is no destruction?

  That may be assumed.

  Well, I said, and is there no evil which corrupts the soul?

  Yes, he said, there are all the evils which we were just now
passing in review: unrighteousness, intemperance, cowardice,
ignorance.

  But does any of these dissolve or destroy her?--and here do
not let us fall into the error of supposing that the unjust and
foolish man, when he is detected, perishes through his own in-
justice, which is an evil of the soul. Take the analogy of the
body: The evil of the body is a disease which wastes and re-
duces and annihilates the body; and all the things of which
we were just now speaking come to annihilation through their
own corruption attaching to them and inhering in them and
so destroying them. Is not this true?

  Yes.

  Consider the soul in like manner. Does the injustice or
other evil which exists in the soul waste and consume her?
Do they by attaching to the soul and inhering in her at last
bring her to death, and so separate her from the body?

  Certainly not.

  And yet, I said, it is unreasonable to suppose that anything
can perish from without through affection of external evil
which could not be destroyed from within by a corruption of
its own?

  It is, he replied.

  Consider, I said, Glaucon, that even the badness of food,
whether staleness, decomposition, or any other bad quality,
when confined to the actual food, is not supposed to destroy
the body; although, if the badness of food communicates cor-
ruption to the body, then we should say that the body has been
destroyed by a corruption of itself, which is disease, brought
on by this; but that the body, being one thing, can be destroyed
by the badness of the food, which is another, and which does
not engender any natural infection--this we shall absolutely
deny?

  Very true.

  And, on the same principle, unless some bodily evil can pro-
duce an evil of the soul, we must not suppose that the soul,
which is one thing, can be dissolved by any merely external
evil which belongs to another?

  Yes, he said, there is reason in that.
Either, then, let us refute this conclusion, or, while it remains
unrefuted, let us never say that fever, or any other disease, or
the knife put to the throat, or even the cutting up of the whole
body into the minutest pieces, can destroy the soul, until she
herself is proved to become more unholy or unrighteous in con-
sequence of these things being done to the body; but that the
soul, or anything else if not destroyed by an internal evil, can
be destroyed by an external one, is not to be affirmed by any
man.

  And surely, he replied, no one will ever prove that the souls
of men become more unjust in consequence of death.

  But if someone who would rather not admit the immortality
of the soul boldly denies this, and says that the dying do really
become more evil and unrighteous, then, if the speaker is right,
I suppose that injustice, like disease, must be assumed to be
fatal to the unjust, and that those who take this disorder die by
the natural inherent power of destruction which evil has, and
which kills them sooner or later, but in quite another way from
that in which, at present, the wicked receive death at the hands
of others as the penalty of their deeds?

  Nay, he said, in that case injustice, if fatal to the unjust, will
not be so very terrible to him, for he will be delivered from evil.
But I rather suspect the opposite to be the truth, and that in-
justice which, if it have the power, will murder others, keeps
the murderer alive--aye, and well awake, too; so far removed
is her dwelling-place from being a house of death.

  True, I said; if the inherent natural vice or evil of the soul
is unable to kill or destroy her, hardly will that which is ap-
pointed to be the destruction of some other body, destroy a soul
or anything else except that of which it was appointed to be
the destruction.

  Yes, that can hardly be.

  But the soul which cannot be destroyed by an evil, whether
inherent or external, must exist forever, and, if existing for-
ever, must be immortal?

  Certainly.

  That is the conclusion, I said; and, if a true conclusion, then
the souls must always be the same, for if none be destroyed
they will not diminish in number. Neither will they increase,
for the increase of the immortal natures must come from some-
thing mortal, and all things would thus end in immortality.

  Very true.

  But this we cannot believe--reason will not allow us--any
more than we can believe the soul, in her truest nature, to be
full of variety and difference and dissimilarity.

  What do you mean? he said.

  The soul, I said, being, as is now proven, immortal, must
be the fairest of compositions and cannot be compounded of
many elements?

  Certainly not.

  Her immortality is demonstrated by the previous argument,
and there are many other proofs; but to see her as she really
is, not as we now behold her, marred by communion with the
body and other miseries, you must contemplate her with the
eye of reason, in her original purity; and then her beauty will
be revealed, and justice and injustice and all the things which
we have described will be manifested more clearly. Thus far,
we have spoken the truth concerning her as she appears at pres-
ent, but we must remember also that we have seen her only in
a condition which may be compared to that of the sea-god Glau-
cus, whose original image can hardly be discerned because his
natural members are broken off and crushed and damaged by
the waves in all sorts of ways, and incrustations have grown
over them of sea-weed and shells and stones, so that he is more
like some monster than he is to his own natural form. And
the soul which we behold is in a similar condition, disfigured
by ten thousand ills. But not there, Glaucon, not there must
we look.
Where, then?

  At her love of wisdom. Let us see whom she affects, and
what society and converse she seeks in virtue of her near kin-
dred with the immortal and eternal and divine; also how differ-
ent she would become if, wholly following this superior princi-
ple, and borne by a divine impulse out of the ocean in which
she now is, and disengaged from the stones and shells and
things of earth and rock which in wild variety spring up around
her because she feeds upon earth, and is overgrown by the good
things in this life as they are termed: then you would see her as
she is, and know whether she have one shape only or many,
or what her nature is. Of her affections and of the forms
which she takes in this present life I think that we have now
said enough.

  True, he replied.

  And thus, I said, we have fulfilled the conditions of the argu-
ment; we have not introduced the rewards and glories of
justice, which, as you were saying, are to be found in Homer
and Hesiod; but justice in her own nature has been shown to
be the best for the soul in her own nature. Let a man do what
is just, whether he have the ring of Gyges or not, and even if
in addition to the ring of Gyges he put on the helmet of Hades.

  Very true.

  And now, Glaucon, there will be no harm in further enu-
merating how many and how great are the rewards which jus-
tice and the other virtues procure to the soul from gods and
men, both in life and after death.

  Certainly not, he said.

  Will you repay me, then, what you borrowed in the argu-
ment?

  What did I borrow?

  The assumption that the just man should appear unjust and
the unjust just: for you were of opinion that even if the true
state of the case could not possibly escape the eyes of gods and
men, still this admission ought to be made for the sake of the
argument, in order that pure justice might be weighed against
pure injustice. Do you remember?

  I should be much to blame if I had forgotten.

  Then, as the cause is decided, I demand on behalf of justice
that the estimation in which she is held by gods and men and
which we acknowledge to be her due should now be restored
to her by us; since she has been shown to confer reality, and
not to deceive those who truly possess her, let what has been
taken from her be given back, that so she may win that palm of
appearance which is hers also, and which she gives to her own.

  The demand, he said, is just.

  In the first place, I said--and this is the first thing which
you will have to give back--the nature both of the just and un-
just is truly known to the gods.

  Granted.

  And if they are both known to them, one must be the friend
and the other the enemy of the gods, as we admitted from the
beginning?

  True.

  And the friend of the gods may be supposed to receive from
them all things at their best, excepting only such evil as is the
necessary consequence of former sins?

  Certainly.

  Then this must be our notion of the just man, that even when
he is in poverty or sickness, or any other seeming misfortune,
all things will in the end work together for good to him in life
and death; for the gods have a care of anyone whose desire is
to become just and to be like God, as far as man can attain the
divine likeness, by the pursuit of virtue?

  Yes, he said; if he is like God he will surely not be neglected
by him.

  And of the unjust may not the opposite be supposed?

  Certainly.

  Such, then, are the palms of victory which the gods give the
just?

  That is my conviction.

  And what do they receive of men? Look at things as they
really are, and you will see that the clever unjust are in the
case of runners, who run well from the starting-place to the
goal, but not back again from the goal: they go off at a great
pace, but in the end only look foolish, slinking away with their
ears draggling on their shoulders, and without a crown; but
the true runner comes to the finish and receives the prize and
is crowned. And this is the way with the just; he who endures
to the end of every action and occasion of his entire life has a
good report and carries off the prize which men have to bestow.

  True.

  And now you must allow me to repeat of the just the bless-
ings which you were attributing to the fortunate unjust. I
shall say of them, what you were saying of the others, that as
they grow older, they become rulers in their own city if they
care to be; they marry whom they like and give in marriage to
whom they will; all that you said of the others I now say of
these. And, on the other hand, of the unjust I say that the
greater number, even though they escape in their youth, are
found out at last and look foolish at the end of their course,
and when they come to be old and miserable are flouted alike
by stranger and citizen; they are beaten, and then come those
things unfit for ears polite, as you truly term them; they will
be racked and have their eyes burned out, as you were saying.
And you may suppose that I have repeated the remainder of
your tale of horrors. But will you let me assume, without re-
citing them, that these things are true?

  Certainly, he said, what you say is true.

  These, then, are the prizes and rewards and gifts which are
bestowed upon the just by gods and men in this present life,
in addition to the other good things which justice of herself
provides.

  Yes, he said; and they are fair and lasting.

  And yet, I said, all these are as nothing either in number or
greatness in comparison with those other recompenses which
await both just and unjust after death. And you ought to hear
them, and then both just and unjust will have received from us
a full payment of the debt which the argument owes to them.

  Speak, he said; there are few things which I would more
gladly hear.

  Well, I said, I will tell you a tale; not one of the tales which
Odysseus tells to the hero Alcinous, yet this, too, is a tale of
a hero, Er the son of Armenius, a Pamphylian by birth. He
was slain in battle, and ten days afterward, when the bodies
of the dead were taken up already in a state of corruption, his
body was found unaffected by decay, and carried away home to
be buried. And on the twelfth day, as he was lying on the
funeral pyre, he returned to life and told them what he had seen
in the other world. He said that when his soul left the body he
went on a journey with a great company, and that they came
to a mysterious place at which there were two openings in the
earth; they were near together, and over against them were
two other openings in the heaven above. In the intermediate
space there were judges seated, who commanded the just, after
they had given judgment on them and had bound their sen-
tences in front of them, to ascend by the heavenly way on the
right hand; and in like manner the unjust were bidden by them
to descend by the lower way on the left hand; these also bore
the symbols of their deeds, but fastened on their backs. He
drew near, and they told him that he was to be the messenger
who would carry the report of the other world to them, and
they bade him hear and see all that was to be heard and seen in
that place. Then he beheld and saw on one side the souls de-
parting at either opening of heaven and earth when sentence
had been given on them; and at the two other openings other
souls, some ascending out of the earth dusty and worn with
travel, some descending out of heaven clean and bright. And
arriving ever and anon they seemed to have come from a long
journey, and they went forth with gladness into the meadow,
where they encamped as at a festival; and those who knew one
another embraced and conversed, the souls which came from
earth curiously inquiring about the things above, and the souls
which came from heaven about the things beneath. And they
told one another of what had happened by the way, those from
below weeping and sorrowing at the remembrance of the things
which they had endured and seen in their journey beneath the
earth (now the journey lasted a thousand years), while those
from above were describing heavenly delights and visions of
inconceivable beauty. The story, Glaucon, would take too long
to tell; but the sum was this: He said that for every wrong
which they had done to anyone they suffered tenfold; or once
in a hundred years--such being reckoned to be the length of
man's life, and the penalty being thus paid ten times in a thou-
sand years. If, for example, there were any who had been
the cause of many deaths, or had betrayed or enslaved cities
or armies, or been guilty of any other evil behavior, for each
and all of their offences they received punishment ten times
over, and the rewards of beneficence and justice and holiness
were in the same proportion. I need hardly repeat what he
said concerning young children dying almost as soon as they
were born. Of piety and impiety to gods and parents, and of
murderers, there were retributions other and greater far which
he described. He mentioned that he was present when one of
the spirits asked another, "Where is Ardiaeus the Great?"
(Now this Ardiaeus lived a thousand years before the time of
Er: he had been the tyrant of some city of Pamphylia, and had
murdered his aged father and his elder brother, and was said to
have committed many other abominable crimes.) The answer
of the other spirit was: "He comes not hither, and will never
come." And this, said he, was one of the dreadful sights
which we ourselves witnessed. We were at the mouth of the
cavern, and, having completed all our experiences, were about
to reascend, when of a sudden Ardiaeus appeared and several
others, most of whom were tyrants; and there were also, be-
sides the tyrants, private individuals who had been great crimi-
nals: they were just, as they fancied, about to return into the
upper world, but the mouth, instead of admitting them, gave a
roar, whenever any of these incurable sinners or someone who
had not been sufficiently punished tried to ascend; and then wild
men of fiery aspect, who were standing by and heard the sound,
seized and carried them off; and Ardiaeus and others they
bound head and foot and hand, and threw them down and
flayed them with scourges, and dragged them along the road
at the side, carding them on thorns like wool, and declaring to
the passers-by what were their crimes, and that they were
being taken away to be cast into hell. And of all the many
terrors which they had endured, he said that there was none
like the terror which each of them felt at that moment, lest they
should hear the voice; and when there was silence, one by one
they ascended with exceeding joy. These, said Er, were the
penalties and retributions, and there were blessings as great.

  Now when the spirits which were in the meadow had tarried
seven days, on the eighth they were obliged to proceed on their
journey, and, on the fourth day after, he said that they came
to a place where they could see from above a line of light,
straight as a column, extending right through the whole heaven
and through the earth, in color resembling the rainbow, only
brighter and purer; another day's journey brought them to the
place, and there, in the midst of the light, they saw the ends of
the chains of heaven let down from above: for this light is the
belt of heaven, and holds together the circle of the universe,
like the under-girders of a trireme. From these ends is extend-
ed the spindle of Necessity, on which all the revolutions turn.
The shaft and hook of this spindle are made of steel, and the
whorl is made partly of steel and also partly of other materials.
Now the whorl is in form like the whorl used on earth; and
the description of it implied that there is one large hollow whorl
which is quite scooped out, and into this is fitted another lesser
one, and another, and another, and four others, making eight
in all, like vessels which fit into one another; the whorls show
their edges on the upper side, and on their lower side all to-
gether form one continuous whorl. This is pierced by the
spindle, which is driven home through the centre of the eighth.
The first and outermost whorl has the rim broadest, and the
seven inner whorls are narrower, in the following proportions
--the sixth is next to the first in size, the fourth next to the
sixth; then comes the eighth; the seventh is fifth, the fifth is
sixth, the third is seventh, last and eighth comes the second.
The largest (or fixed stars) is spangled, and the seventh (or
sun) is brightest; the eighth (or moon) colored by the reflected
light of the seventh; the second and fifth (Saturn and Mer-
cury) are in color like one another, and yellower than the pre-
ceding; the third (Venus) has the whitest light; the fourth
(Mars) is reddish; the sixth (Jupiter) is in whiteness second.
Now the whole spindle has the same motion; but, as the whole
revolves in one direction, the seven inner circles move slowly in
the other, and of these the swiftest is the eighth; next in swift-
ness are the seventh, sixth, and fifth, which move together;
third in swiftness appeared to move according to the law of
this reversed motion, the fourth; the third appeared fourth, and
the second fifth. The spindle turns on the knees of Necessity;
and on the upper surface of each circle is a siren, who goes
round with them, hymning a single tone or note. The eight
together form one harmony; and round about, at equal inter-
vals, there is another band, three in number, each sitting upon
her throne: these are the Fates, daughters of Necessity, who
are clothed in white robes and have chaplets upon their heads,
Lachesis and Clotho and Atropos, who accompany with their
voices the harmony of the sirens--Lachesis singing of the past,
Clotho of the present, Atropos of the future; Clotho from time
to time assisting with a touch of her right hand the revolution
of the outer circle of the whorl or spindle, and Atropos with
her left hand touching and guiding the inner ones, and Lachesis
laying hold of either in turn, first with one hand and then with
the other.

  When Er and the spirits arrived, their duty was to go at once
to Lachesis; but first of all there came a prophet who arranged
them in order; then he took from the knees of Lachesis lots and
samples of lives, and having mounted a high pulpit, spoke as
follows: "Hear the word of Lachesis, the daughter of Neces-
sity. Mortal souls, behold a new cycle of life and mortality.
Your genius will not be allotted to you, but you will choose
your genius; and let him who draws the first lot have the first
choice, and the life which he chooses shall be his destiny. Vir-
tue is free, and as a man honors or dishonors her he will have
more or less of her; the responsibility is with the chooser--God
is justified." When the Interpreter had thus spoken he scat-
tered lots indifferently among them all, and each of them took
up the lot which fell near him, all but Er himself (he was not
allowed), and each as he took his lot perceived the number
which he had obtained. Then the Interpreter placed on the
ground before them the samples of lives; and there were many
more lives than the souls present, and they were of all sorts.
There were lives of every animal and of man in every condition.
And there were tyrannies among them, some lasting out the
tyrant's life, others which broke off in the middle and came to
an end in poverty and exile and beggary; and there were lives
of famous men, some who were famous for their form and
beauty as well as for their strength and success in games, or,
again, for their birth and the qualities of their ancestors; and
some who were the reverse of famous for the opposite qualities.
And of women likewise; there was not, however, any definite
character in them, because the soul, when choosing a new life,
must of necessity become different. But there was every other
quality, and they all mingled with one another, and also with
elements of wealth and poverty, and disease and health; and
there were mean states also. And here, my dear Glaucon, is
the supreme peril of our human state; and therefore the utmost
care should be taken. Let each one of us leave every other
kind of knowledge and seek and follow one thing only, if per-
adventure he may be able to learn and may find someone who
will make him able to learn and discern between good and evil,
and so to choose always and everywhere the better life as he
has opportunity. He should consider the bearing of all these
things which have been mentioned severally and collectively
upon virtue; he should know what the effect of beauty is when
combined with poverty or wealth in a particular soul, and what
are the good and evil consequences of noble and humble birth,
of private and public station, of strength and weakness, of
cleverness and dullness, and of all the natural and acquired gifts
of the soul, and the operation of them when conjoined; he will
then look at the nature of the soul, and from the consideration
of all these qualities he will be able to determine which is the
better and which is the worse; and so he will choose, giving
the name of evil to the life which will make his soul more un-
just, and good to the life which will make his soul more just;
all else he will disregard. For we have seen and know that this
is the best choice both in life and after death. A man must
take with him into the world below an adamantine faith in truth
and right, that there too he may be undazzled by the desire of
wealth or the other allurements of evil, lest, coming upon tyran-
nies and similar villanies, he do irremediable wrongs to others
and suffer yet worse himself; but let him know how to choose
the mean and avoid the extremes on either side, as far as possi-
ble, not only in this life but in all that which is to come. For
this is the way of happiness.

  And according to the report of the messenger from the other
world this was what the prophet said at the time: "Even for
the last comer, if he chooses wisely and will live diligently, there
is appointed a happy and not undesirable existence. Let not
him who chooses first be careless, and let not the last despair."
And when he had spoken, he who had the first choice came for-
ward and in a moment chose the greatest tyranny; his mind
having been darkened by folly and sensuality, he had not
thought out the whole matter before he chose, and did not at
first sight perceive that he was fated, among other evils, to de-
vour his own children. But when he had time to reflect, and
saw what was in the lot, he began to beat his breast and lament
over his choice, forgetting the proclamation of the prophet;
for, instead of throwing the blame of his misfortune on himself,
he accused chance and the gods, and everything rather than
himself. Now he was one of those who came from heaven, and
in a former life had dwelt in a well-ordered State, but his virtue
was a matter of habit only, and he had no philosophy. And
it was true of others who were similarly overtaken, that the
greater number of them came from heaven and therefore they
had never been schooled by trial, whereas the pilgrims WhO
came from earth, having themselves suffered and seen others
suffer, were not in a hurry to choose. And owing to this inex-
perience of theirs, and also because the lot was a chance, many
of the souls exchanged a good destiny for an evil or an evil for
a good. For if a man had always on his arrival in this world
dedicated himself from the first to sound philosophy, and had
been moderately fortunate in the number of the lot, he might,
as the messenger reported, be happy here, and also his journey
to another life and return to this, instead of being rough and
underground, would be smooth and heavenly. Most curious,
he said, was the spectacle--sad and laughable and strange; for
the choice of the souls was in most cases based on their experi-
ence of a previous life. There he saw the soul which had once
been Orpheus choosing the life of a swan out of enmity to
the race of women, hating to be born of a woman because they
had been his murderers; he beheld also the soul of Thamyras
choosing the life of a nightingale; birds, on the other hand,
like the swans and other musicians, wanting to be men. The
soul which obtained the twentieth lot chose the life of a lion,
and this was the soul of Ajax the son of Telamon, who would
not be a man, remembering the injustice which was done him
in the judgment about the arms. The next was Agamemnon,
who took the life of an eagle, because, like Ajax, he hated
human nature by reason of his sufferings. About the middle
came the lot of Atalanta; she, seeing the great fame of an ath-
lete, was unable to resist the temptation: and after her there
followed the soul of Epeus the son of Panopeus passing into
the nature of a woman cunning in the arts; and far away among
the last who chose, the soul of the jester Thersites was putting
on the form of a monkey. There came also the soul of Odys-
seus having yet to make a choice, and his lot happened to be
the last of them all. Now the recollection of former toils had
disenchanted him of ambition, and he went about for a consid-
erable time in search of the life of a private man who had no
cares; he had some difficulty in finding this, which was lying
about and had been neglected by everybody else; and when he
saw it, he said that he would have done the same had his lot
been first instead of last, and that he was delighted to have it.
And not only did men pass into animals, but I must also men-
tion that there were animals tame and wild who changed into
one another and into corresponding human natures--the good
into the gentle and the evil into the savage, in all sorts of com-
binations.

  All the souls had now chosen their lives, and they went in
the order of their choice to Lachesis, who sent with them the
genius whom they had severally chosen, to be the guardian of
their lives and the fulfiller of the choice: this genius led the
souls first to Clotho, and drew them within the revolution of
the spindle impelled by her hand, thus ratifying the destiny of
each; and then, when they were fastened to this, carried them
to Atropos, who spun the threads and made them irreversible,
whence without turning round they passed beneath the throne
of Necessity; and when they had all passed, they marched on
in a scorching heat to the plain of Forgetfulness, which was a
barren waste destitute of trees and verdure; and then toward
evening they encamped by the river of Unmindfulness, whose
water no vessel can hold; of this they were all obliged to drink
a certain quantity, and those who were not saved by wisdom
drank more than was necessary; and each one as he drank for-
got all things. Now after they had gone to rest, about the
middle of the night there were a thunderstorm and earthquake,
and then in an instant they were driven upward in all manner
of ways to their birth, like stars shooting. He himself was
hindered from drinking the water. But in what manner or by
what means he returned to the body he could not say; only, in
the morning, awaking suddenly, he found himself lying on the
pyre.

  And thus, Glaucon, the tale has been saved and has not per-
ished, and will save us if we are obedient to the word spoken;
and we shall pass safely over the river of Forgetfulness, and
our soul will not be defiled. Wherefore my counsel is that we
hold fast ever to the heavenly way and follow after justice and
virtue always, considering that the soul is immortal and able
to endure every sort of good and every sort of evil. Thus shall
we live dear to one another and to the gods, both while remain-
ing here and when, like conquerors in the games who go round
to gather gifts, we receive our reward. And it shall be well
with us both in this life and in the pilgrimage of a thousand
years which we have been describing.


[End.]
                                     360 BC
                                   SYMPOSIUM
                                    by Plato
                         translated by Benjamin Jowett
SYMPOSIUM
  PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: APOLLODORUS, who repeats to his companion
the dialogue which he had heard from Aristodemus, and had already once
narrated to Glaucon; PHAEDRUS; PAUSANIAS; ERYXIMACHUS; ARISTOPHANES;
AGATHON; SOCRATES; ALCIBIADES; A TROOP OF REVELLERS. Scene: The
House of Agathon.

  Concerning the things about which you ask to be informed I believe
that I am not ill-prepared with an answer. For the day before
yesterday I was coming from my own home at Phalerum to the city, and
one of my acquaintance, who had caught a sight of me from behind,
hind, out playfully in the distance, said: Apollodorus, O thou
Phalerian man, halt! So I did as I was bid; and then he said, I was
looking for you, Apollodorus, only just now, that I might ask you
about the speeches in praise of love, which were delivered by
Socrates, Alcibiades, and others, at Agathon's supper. Phoenix, the
son of Philip, told another person who told me of them; his
narrative was very indistinct, but he said that you knew, and I wish
that you would give me an account of them. Who, if not you, should
be the reporter of the words of your friend? And first tell me, he
said, were you present at this meeting?
  Your informant, Glaucon, I said, must have been very indistinct
indeed, if you imagine that the occasion was recent; or that I could
have been of the party.
  Why, yes, he replied, I thought so.
  Impossible: I said. Are you ignorant that for many years Agathon has
not resided at Athens; and not three have elapsed since I became
acquainted with Socrates, and have made it my daily business to know
all that he says and does. There was a time when I was running about
the world, fancying myself to be well employed, but I was really a
most wretched thing, no better than you are now. I thought that I
ought to do anything rather than be a philosopher.
  Well, he said, jesting apart, tell me when the meeting occurred.
  In our boyhood, I replied, when Agathon won the prize with his first
tragedy, on the day after that on which he and his chorus offered
the sacrifice of victory.
  Then it must have been a long while ago, he said; and who told
you-did Socrates?
  No indeed, I replied, but the same person who told Phoenix;-he was a
little fellow, who never wore any shoes Aristodemus, of the deme of
Cydathenaeum. He had been at Agathon's feast; and I think that in
those days there was no one who was a more devoted admirer of
Socrates. Moreover, I have asked Socrates about the truth of some
parts of his narrative, and he confirmed them. Then, said Glaucon, let
us have the tale over again; is not the road to Athens just made for
conversation? And so we walked, and talked of the discourses on
love; and therefore, as I said at first, I am not ill-prepared to
comply with your request, and will have another rehearsal of them if
you like. For to speak or to hear others speak of philosophy always
gives me the greatest pleasure, to say nothing of the profit. But when
I hear another strain, especially that of you rich men and traders,
such conversation displeases me; and I pity you who are my companions,
because you think that you are doing something when in reality you are
doing nothing. And I dare say that you pity me in return, whom you
regard as an unhappy creature, and very probably you are right. But
I certainly know of you what you only think of me-there is the
difference.
  Companion. I see, Apollodorus, that you are just the same-always
speaking evil of yourself, and of others; and I do believe that you
pity all mankind, with the exception of Socrates, yourself first of
all, true in this to your old name, which, however deserved I know how
you acquired, of Apollodorus the madman; for you are always raging
against yourself and everybody but Socrates.
  Apollodorus. Yes, friend, and the reason why I am said to be mad,
and out of my wits, is just because I have these notions of myself and
you; no other evidence is required.
  Com. No more of that, Apollodorus; but let me renew my request
that you would repeat the conversation.
  Apoll. Well, the tale of love was on this wise:-But perhaps I had
better begin at the beginning, and endeavour to give you the exact
words of Aristodemus:
  He said that he met Socrates fresh from the bath and sandalled;
and as the sight of the sandals was unusual, he asked him whither he
was going that he had been converted into such a beau:-
  To a banquet at Agathon's, he replied, whose invitation to his
sacrifice of victory I refused yesterday, fearing a crowd, but
promising that I would come to-day instead; and so I have put on my
finery, because he is such a fine man. What say you to going with me
unasked?
  I will do as you bid me, I replied.
  Follow then, he said, and let us demolish the proverb:

    To the feasts of inferior men the good unbidden go;

instead of which our proverb will run:-

    To the feasts of the good the good unbidden go;

and this alteration may be supported by the authority of Homer
himself, who not only demolishes but literally outrages the proverb.
For, after picturing Agamemnon as the most valiant of men, he makes
Menelaus, who is but a fainthearted warrior, come unbidden to the
banquet of Agamemnon, who is feasting and offering sacrifices, not the
better to the worse, but the worse to the better.
  I rather fear, Socrates, said Aristodemus, lest this may still be my
case; and that, like Menelaus in Homer, I shall be the inferior
person, who

    To the leasts of the wise unbidden goes.

But I shall say that I was bidden of you, and then you will have to
make an excuse.

    Two going together,

he replied, in Homeric fashion, one or other of them may invent an
excuse by the way.
  This was the style of their conversation as they went along.
Socrates dropped behind in a fit of abstraction, and desired
Aristodemus, who was waiting, to go on before him. When he reached the
house of Agathon he found the doors wide open, and a comical thing
happened. A servant coming out met him, and led him at once into the
banqueting-hall in which the guests were reclining, for the banquet
was about to begin. Welcome, Aristodemus, said Agathon, as soon as
he appeared-you are just in time to sup with us; if you come on any
other matter put it off, and make one of us, as I was looking for
you yesterday and meant to have asked you, if I could have found
you. But what have you done with Socrates?
  I turned round, but Socrates was nowhere to be seen; and I had to
explain that he had been with me a moment before, and that I came by
his invitation to the supper.
  You were quite right in coming, said Agathon; but where is he
himself?
  He was behind me just now, as I entered, he said, and I cannot think
what has become of him.
  Go and look for him, boy, said Agathon, and bring him in; and do
you, Aristodemus, meanwhile take the place by Eryximachus.
  The servant then assisted him to wash, and he lay down, and
presently another servant came in and reported that our friend
Socrates had retired into the portico of the neighbouring house.
"There he is fixed," said he, "and when I call to him he will not
stir."
  How strange, said Agathon; then you must call him again, and keep
calling him.
  Let him alone, said my informant; he has a way of stopping
anywhere and losing himself without any reason. I believe that he will
soon appear; do not therefore disturb him.
  Well, if you think so, I will leave him, said Agathon. And then,
turning to the servants, he added, "Let us have supper without waiting
for him. Serve up whatever you please, for there; is no one to give
you orders; hitherto I have never left you to yourselves. But on
this occasion imagine that you art our hosts, and that I and the
company are your guests; treat us well, and then we shall commend
you." After this, supper was served, but still no-Socrates; and during
the meal Agathon several times expressed a wish to send for him, but
Aristodemus objected; and at last when the feast was about half
over-for the fit, as usual, was not of long duration-Socrates entered;
Agathon, who was reclining alone at the end of the table, begged
that he would take the place next to him; that "I may touch you," he
said, "and have the benefit of that wise thought which came into
your mind in the portico, and is now in your possession; for I am
certain that you would not have come away until you had found what you
sought."
  How I wish, said Socrates, taking his place as he was desired,
that wisdom could be infused by touch, out of the fuller the emptier
man, as water runs through wool out of a fuller cup into an emptier
one; if that were so, how greatly should I value the privilege of
reclining at your side! For you would have filled me full with a
stream of wisdom plenteous and fair; whereas my own is of a very
mean and questionable sort, no better than a dream. But yours is
bright and full of promise, and was manifested forth in all the
splendour of youth the day before yesterday, in the presence of more
than thirty thousand Hellenes.
  You are mocking, Socrates, said Agathon, and ere long you and I will
have to determine who bears off the palm of wisdom-of this Dionysus
shall be the judge; but at present you are better occupied with
supper.
  Socrates took his place on the couch, and supped with the rest;
and then libations were offered, and after a hymn had been sung to the
god, and there had been the usual ceremonies, they were about to
commence drinking, when Pausanias said, And now, my friends, how can
we drink with least injury to ourselves? I can assure you that I
feel severely the effect of yesterday's potations, and must have
time to recover; and I suspect that most of you are in the same
predicament, for you were of the party yesterday. Consider then: How
can the drinking be made easiest?
  I entirely agree, said Aristophanes, that we should, by all means,
avoid hard drinking, for I was myself one of those who were
yesterday drowned in drink.
  I think that you are right, said Eryximachus, the son of Acumenus;
but I should still like to hear one other person speak: Is Agathon
able to drink hard?
  I am not equal to it, said Agathon.
  Then, the Eryximachus, the weak heads like myself, Aristodemus,
Phaedrus, and others who never can drink, are fortunate in finding
that the stronger ones are not in a drinking mood. (I do not include
Socrates, who is able either to drink or to abstain, and will not
mind, whichever we do.) Well, as of none of the company seem
disposed to drink much, I may be forgiven for saying, as a
physician, that drinking deep is a bad practice, which I never follow,
if I can help, and certainly do not recommend to another, least of all
to any one who still feels the effects of yesterday's carouse.
  I always do what you advise, and especially what you prescribe as
a physician, rejoined Phaedrus the Myrrhinusian, and the rest of the
company, if they are wise, will do the same.
  It was agreed that drinking was not to be the order of the day,
but that they were all to drink only so much as they pleased.
  Then, said Eryximachus, as you are all agreed that drinking is to be
voluntary, and that there is to be no compulsion, I move, in the
next place, that the flute-girl, who has just made her appearance,
be told to go away and play to herself, or, if she likes, to the women
who are within. To-day let us have conversation instead; and, if you
will allow me, I will tell you what sort of conversation. This
proposal having been accepted, Eryximachus proceeded as follows:-
  I will begin, he said, after the manner of Melanippe in Euripides,

                  Not mine the word

which I am about to speak, but that of Phaedrus. For often he says
to me in an indignant tone: "What a strange thing it is,
Eryximachus, that, whereas other gods have poems and hymns made in
their honour, the great and glorious god, Love, has no encomiast among
all the poets who are so many. There are the worthy sophists too-the
excellent Prodicus for example, who have descanted in prose on the
virtues of Heracles and other heroes; and, what is still more
extraordinary, I have met with a philosophical work in which the
utility of salt has been made the theme of an eloquent discourse;
and many other like things have had a like honour bestowed upon
them. And only to think that there should have been an eager
interest created about them, and yet that to this day no one has
ever dared worthily to hymn Love's praises! So entirely has this great
deity been neglected." Now in this Phaedrus seems to me to be quite
right, and therefore I want to offer him a contribution; also I
think that at the present moment we who are here assembled cannot do
better than honour the. god Love. If you agree with me, there will
be no lack of conversation; for I mean to propose that each of us in
turn, going from left to right, shall make a speech in honour of Love.
Let him give us the best which he can; and Phaedrus, because he is
sitting first on the left hand, and because he is the father of the
thought, shall begin.
  No one will vote against you, Eryximachus, said Socrates. How can
I oppose your motion, who profess to understand nothing but matters of
love; nor, I presume, will Agathon and Pausanias; and there can be
no doubt of Aristophanes, whose whole concern is with Dionysus and
Aphrodite; nor will any one disagree of those whom I, see around me.
The proposal, as I am aware, may seem rather hard upon us whose
place is last; but we shall be contented if we hear some good speeches
first. Let Phaedrus begin the praise of Love, and good luck to him.
All the company expressed their assent, and desired him to do as
Socrates bade him.
  Aristodemus did not recollect all that was said, nor do I
recollect all that he related to me; but I will tell you what I
thought most worthy of remembrance, and what the chief speakers said.
  Phaedrus began by affirming that love is a mighty god, and wonderful
among gods and men, but especially wonderful in his birth. For he is
the eldest of the gods, which is an honour to him; and a proof of
his claim to this honour is, that of his parents there is no memorial;
neither poet nor prose-writer has ever affirmed that he had any. As
Hesiod says:

     First Chaos came, and then broad-bosomed Earth,
     The everlasting seat of all that is,
     And Love.

In other words, after Chaos, the Earth and Love, these two, came
into being. Also Parmenides sings of Generation:

     First in the train of gods, he fashioned Love.

And Acusilaus agrees with Hesiod. Thus numerous are the witnesses
who acknowledge Love to be the eldest of the gods. And not only is
he the eldest, he is also the source of the greatest benefits to us.
For I know not any greater blessing to a young man who is beginning
life than a virtuous lover or to the lover than a beloved youth. For
the principle which ought to be the guide of men who would nobly
live at principle, I say, neither kindred, nor honour, nor wealth, nor
any other motive is able to implant so well as love. Of what am I
speaking? Of the sense of honour and dishonour, without which
neither states nor individuals ever do any good or great work. And I
say that a lover who is detected in doing any dishonourable act, or
submitting through cowardice when any dishonour is done to him by
another, will be more pained at being detected by his beloved than
at being seen by his father, or by his companions, or by any one else.
The beloved too, when he is found in any disgraceful situation, has
the same feeling about his lover. And if there were only some way of
contriving that a state or an army should be made up of lovers and
their loves, they would be the very best governors of their own
city, abstaining from all dishonour, and emulating one another in
honour; and when fighting at each other's side, although a mere
handful, they would overcome the world. For what lover would not
choose rather to be seen by all mankind than by his beloved, either
when abandoning his post or throwing away his arms? He would be
ready to die a thousand deaths rather than endure this. Or who would
desert his beloved or fail him in the hour of danger? The veriest
coward would become an inspired hero, equal to the bravest, at such
a time; Love would inspire him. That courage which, as Homer says, the
god breathes into the souls of some heroes, Love of his own nature
infuses into the lover.
  Love will make men dare to die for their beloved-love alone; and
women as well as men. Of this, Alcestis, the daughter of Pelias, is
a monument to all Hellas; for she was willing to lay down her life
on behalf of her husband, when no one else would, although he had a
father and mother; but the tenderness of her love so far exceeded
theirs, that she made them seem to be strangers in blood to their
own son, and in name only related to him; and so noble did this action
of hers appear to the gods, as well as to men, that among the many who
have done virtuously she is one of the very few to whom, in admiration
of her noble action, they have granted the privilege of returning
alive to earth; such exceeding honour is paid by the gods to the
devotion and virtue of love. But Orpheus, the son of Oeagrus, the
harper, they sent empty away, and presented to him an apparition
only of her whom he sought, but herself they would not give up,
because he showed no spirit; he was only a harp-player, and did
not-dare like Alcestis to die for love, but was contriving how he
might enter hades alive; moreover, they afterwards caused him to
suffer death at the hands of women, as the punishment of his
cowardliness. Very different was the reward of the true love of
Achilles towards his lover Patroclus-his lover and not his love (the
notion that Patroclus was the beloved one is a foolish error into
which Aeschylus has fallen, for Achilles was surely the fairer of
the two, fairer also than all the other heroes; and, as Homer
informs us, he was still beardless, and younger far). And greatly as
the gods honour the virtue of love, still the return of love on the
part of the beloved to the lover is more admired and valued and
rewarded by them, for the lover is more divine; because he is inspired
by God. Now Achilles was quite aware, for he had been told by his
mother, that he might avoid death and return home, and live to a
good old age, if he abstained from slaying Hector. Nevertheless he
gave his life to revenge his friend, and dared to die, not only in his
defence, but after he was dead Wherefore the gods honoured him even
above Alcestis, and sent him to the Islands of the Blest. These are my
reasons for affirming that Love is the eldest and noblest and
mightiest of the gods; and the chiefest author and giver of virtue
in life, and of happiness after death.
  This, or something like this, was the speech of Phaedrus; and some
other speeches followed which Aristodemus did not remember; the next
which he repeated was that of Pausanias. Phaedrus, he said, the
argument has not been set before us, I think, quite in the right
form;-we should not be called upon to praise Love in such an
indiscriminate manner. If there were only one Love, then what you said
would be well enough; but since there are more Loves than
one,-should have begun by determining which of them was to be the
theme of our praises. I will amend this defect; and first of all I
would tell you which Love is deserving of praise, and then try to hymn
the praiseworthy one in a manner worthy of him. For we all know that
Love is inseparable from Aphrodite, and if there were only one
Aphrodite there would be only one Love; but as there are two goddesses
there must be two Loves.
  And am I not right in asserting that there are two goddesses? The
elder one, having no mother, who is called the heavenly
Aphrodite-she is the daughter of Uranus; the younger, who is the
daughter of Zeus and Dione-her we call common; and the Love who is her
fellow-worker is rightly named common, as the other love is called
heavenly. All the gods ought to have praise given to them, but not
without distinction of their natures; and therefore I must try to
distinguish the characters of the two Loves. Now actions vary
according to the manner of their performance. Take, for example,
that which we are now doing, drinking, singing and talking these
actions are not in themselves either good or evil, but they turn out
in this or that way according to the mode of performing them; and when
well done they are good, and when wrongly done they are evil; and in
like manner not every love, but only that which has a noble purpose,
is noble and worthy of praise. The Love who is the offspring of the
common Aphrodite is essentially common, and has no discrimination,
being such as the meaner sort of men feel, and is apt to be of women
as well as of youths, and is of the body rather than of the soul-the
most foolish beings are the objects of this love which desires only to
gain an end, but never thinks of accomplishing the end nobly, and
therefore does good and evil quite indiscriminately. The goddess who
is his mother is far younger than the other, and she was born of the
union of the male and female, and partakes of both.
  But the offspring of the heavenly Aphrodite is derived from a mother
in whose birth the female has no part,-she is from the male only; this
is that love which is of youths, and the goddess being older, there is
nothing of wantonness in her. Those who are inspired by this love turn
to the male, and delight in him who is the more valiant and
intelligent nature; any one may recognise the pure enthusiasts in
the very character of their attachments. For they love not boys, but
intelligent, beings whose reason is beginning to be developed, much
about the time at which their beards begin to grow. And in choosing
young men to be their companions, they mean to be faithful to them,
and pass their whole life in company with them, not to take them in
their inexperience, and deceive them, and play the fool with them,
or run away from one to another of them. But the love of young boys
should be forbidden by law, because their future is uncertain; they
may turn out good or bad, either in body or soul, and much noble
enthusiasm may be thrown away upon them; in this matter the good are a
law to themselves, and the coarser sort of lovers ought to be
restrained by force; as we restrain or attempt to restrain them from
fixing their affections on women of free birth. These are the
persons who bring a reproach on love; and some have been led to deny
the lawfulness of such attachments because they see the impropriety
and evil of them; for surely nothing that is decorously and lawfully
done can justly be censured.
  Now here and in Lacedaemon the rules about love are perplexing,
but in most cities they are simple and easily intelligible; in Elis
and Boeotia, and in countries having no gifts of eloquence, they are
very straightforward; the law is simply in favour of these connexions,
and no one, whether young or old, has anything to say to their
discredit; the reason being, as I suppose, that they are men of few
words in those parts, and therefore the lovers do not like the trouble
of pleading their suit. In Ionia and other places, and generally in
countries which are subject to the barbarians, the custom is held to
be dishonourable; loves of youths share the evil repute in which
philosophy and gymnastics are held because they are inimical to
tyranny; for the interests of rulers require that their subjects
should be poor in spirit and that there should be no strong bond of
friendship or society among them, which love, above all other motives,
is likely to inspire, as our Athenian tyrants-learned by experience;
for the love of Aristogeiton and the constancy of Harmodius had
strength which undid their power. And, therefore, the ill-repute
into which these attachments have fallen is to be ascribed to the evil
condition of those who make them to be ill-reputed; that is to say, to
the self-seeking of the governors and the cowardice of the governed;
on the other hand, the indiscriminate honour which is given to them in
some countries is attributable to the laziness of those who hold
this opinion of them. In our own country a far better principle
prevails, but, as I was saying, the explanation of it is rather
perplexing. For, observe that open loves are held to be more
honourable than secret ones, and that the love of the noblest and
highest, even if their persons are less beautiful than others, is
especially honourable.
  Consider, too, how great is the encouragement which all the world
gives to the lover; neither is he supposed to be doing anything
dishonourable; but if he succeeds he is praised, and if he fail he
is blamed. And in the pursuit of his love the custom of mankind allows
him to do many strange things, which philosophy would bitterly censure
if they were done from any motive of interest, or wish for office or
power. He may pray, and entreat, and supplicate, and swear, and lie on
a mat at the door, and endure a slavery worse than that of any
slave-in any other case friends and enemies would be equally ready
to prevent him, but now there is no friend who will be ashamed of
him and admonish him, and no enemy will charge him with meanness or
flattery; the actions of a lover have a grace which ennobles them; and
custom has decided that they are highly commendable and that there
no loss of character in them; and, what is strangest of all, he only
may swear and forswear himself (so men say), and the gods will forgive
his transgression, for there is no such thing as a lover's oath.
Such is the entire liberty which gods and men have allowed the
lover, according to the custom which prevails in our part of the
world. From this point of view a man fairly argues in Athens to love
and to be loved is held to be a very honourable thing. But when
parents forbid their sons to talk with their lovers, and place them
under a tutor's care, who is appointed to see to these things, and
their companions and equals cast in their teeth anything of the sort
which they may observe, and their elders refuse to silence the
reprovers and do not rebuke them-any one who reflects on all this
will, on the contrary, think that we hold these practices to be most
disgraceful. But, as I was saying at first, the truth as I imagine is,
that whether such practices are honourable or whether they are
dishonourable is not a simple question; they are honourable to him who
follows them honourably, dishonourable to him who follows them
dishonourably. There is dishonour in yielding to the evil, or in an
evil manner; but there is honour in yielding to the good, or in an
honourable manner.
  Evil is the vulgar lover who loves the body rather than the soul,
inasmuch as he is not even stable, because he loves a thing which is
in itself unstable, and therefore when the bloom of youth which he was
desiring is over, he takes wing and flies away, in spite of all his
words and promises; whereas the love of the noble disposition is
life-long, for it becomes one with the everlasting. The custom of
our country would have both of them proven well and truly, and would
have us yield to the one sort of lover and avoid the other, and
therefore encourages some to pursue, and others to fly; testing both
the lover and beloved in contests and trials, until they show to which
of the two classes they respectively belong. And this is the reason
why, in the first place, a hasty attachment is held to be
dishonourable, because time is the true test of this as of most
other things; and secondly there is a dishonour in being overcome by
the love of money, or of wealth, or of political power, whether a
man is frightened into surrender by the loss of them, or, having
experienced the benefits of money and political corruption, is
unable to rise above the seductions of them. For none of these
things are of a permanent or lasting nature; not to mention that no
generous friendship ever sprang from them. There remains, then, only
one way of honourable attachment which custom allows in the beloved,
and this is the way of virtue; for as we admitted that any service
which the lover does to him is not to be accounted flattery or a
dishonour to himself, so the beloved has one way only of voluntary
service which is not dishonourable, and this is virtuous service.
  For we have a custom, and according to our custom any one who does
service to another under the idea that he will be improved by him
either in wisdom, or, in some other particular of virtue-such a
voluntary service, I say, is not to be regarded as a dishonour, and is
not open to the charge of flattery. And these two customs, one the
love of youth, and the other the practice of philosophy and virtue
in general, ought to meet in one, and then the beloved may
honourably indulge the lover. For when the lover and beloved come
together, having each of them a law, and the lover thinks that he is
right in doing any service which he can to his gracious loving one;
and the other that he is right in showing any kindness which he can to
him who is making him wise and good; the one capable of
communicating wisdom and virtue, the other seeking to acquire them
with a view to education and wisdom, when the two laws of love are
fulfilled and meet in one-then, and then only, may the beloved yield
with honour to the lover. Nor when love is of this disinterested
sort is there any disgrace in being deceived, but in every other
case there is equal disgrace in being or not being deceived. For he
who is gracious to his lover under the impression that he is rich, and
is disappointed of his gains because he turns out to be poor, is
disgraced all the same: for he has done his best to show that he would
give himself up to any one's "uses base" for the sake of money; but
this is not honourable. And on the same principle he who gives himself
to a lover because he is a good man, and in the hope that he will be
improved by his company, shows himself to be virtuous, even though the
object of his affection turn out to be a villain, and to have no
virtue; and if he is deceived he has committed a noble error. For he
has proved that for his part he will do anything for anybody with a
view to virtue and improvement, than which there can be nothing
nobler. Thus noble in every case is the acceptance of another for
the sake of virtue. This is that love which is the love of the
heavenly godess, and is heavenly, and of great price to individuals
and cities, making the lover and the beloved alike eager in the work
of their own improvement. But all other loves are the offspring of the
other, who is the common goddess. To you, Phaedrus, I offer this my
contribution in praise of love, which is as good as I could make
extempore.
  Pausanias came to a pause-this is the balanced way in which I have
been taught by the wise to speak; and Aristodemus said that the turn
of Aristophanes was next, but either he had eaten too much, or from
some other cause he had the hiccough, and was obliged to change
turns with Eryximachus the physician, who was reclining on the couch
below him. Eryximachus, he said, you ought either to stop my hiccough,
or to speak in my turn until I have left off.
  I will do both, said Eryximachus: I will speak in your turn, and
do you speak in mine; and while I am speaking let me recommend you
to hold your breath, and if after you have done so for some time the
hiccough is no better, then gargle with a little water; and if it
still continues, tickle your nose with something and sneeze; and if
you sneeze once or twice, even the most violent hiccough is sure to
go. I will do as you prescribe, said Aristophanes, and now get on.
  Eryximachus spoke as follows: Seeing that Pausanias made a fair
beginning, and but a lame ending, I must endeavour to supply his
deficiency. I think that he has rightly distinguished two kinds of
love. But my art further informs me that the double love is not merely
an affection of the soul of man towards the fair, or towards anything,
but is to be found in the bodies of all animals and in productions
of the earth, and I may say in all that is; such is the conclusion
which I seem to have gathered from my own art of medicine, whence I
learn how great and wonderful and universal is the deity of love,
whose empire extends over all things, divine as well as human. And
from medicine I would begin that I may do honour to my art. There
are in the human body these two kinds of love, which are confessedly
different and unlike, and being unlike, they have loves and desires
which are unlike; and the desire of the healthy is one, and the desire
of the diseased is another; and as Pausanias was just now saying
that to indulge good men is honourable, and bad men
dishonourable:-so too in the body the good and healthy elements are to
be indulged, and the bad elements and the elements of disease are
not to be indulged, but discouraged. And this is what the physician
has to do, and in this the art of medicine consists: for medicine
may be regarded generally as the knowledge of the loves and desires of
the body, and how to satisfy them or not; and the best physician is he
who is able to separate fair love from foul, or to convert one into
the other; and he who knows how to eradicate and how to implant
love, whichever is required, and can reconcile the most hostile
elements in the constitution and make them loving friends, is
skilful practitioner. Now the: most hostile are the most opposite,
such as hot and cold, bitter and sweet, moist and dry, and the like.
And my ancestor, Asclepius, knowing how-to implant friendship and
accord in these elements, was the creator of our art, as our friends
the poets here tell us, and I believe them; and not only medicine in
every branch but the arts of gymnastic and husbandry are under his
dominion.
  Any one who pays the least attention to the subject will also
perceive that in music there is the same reconciliation of
opposites; and I suppose that this must have been the meaning, of
Heracleitus, although, his words are not accurate, for he says that is
united by disunion, like the harmony-of bow and the lyre. Now there is
an absurdity saying that harmony is discord or is composed of elements
which are still in a state of discord. But what he probably meant was,
that, harmony is composed of differing notes of higher or lower
pitch which disagreed once, but are now reconciled by the art of
music; for if the higher and lower notes still disagreed, there
could be there could be no harmony-clearly not. For harmony is a
symphony, and symphony is an agreement; but an agreement of
disagreements while they disagree there cannot be; you cannot
harmonize that which disagrees. In like manner rhythm is compounded of
elements short and long, once differing and now-in accord; which
accordance, as in the former instance, medicine, so in all these other
cases, music implants, making love and unison to grow up among them;
and thus music, too, is concerned with the principles of love in their
application to harmony and rhythm. Again, in the essential nature of
harmony and rhythm there is no difficulty in discerning love which has
not yet become double. But when you want to use them in actual life,
either in the composition of songs or in the correct performance of
airs or metres composed already, which latter is called education,
then the difficulty begins, and the good artist is needed. Then the
old tale has to be repeated of fair and heavenly love -the love of
Urania the fair and heavenly muse, and of the duty of accepting the
temperate, and those who are as yet intemperate only that they may
become temperate, and of preserving their love; and again, of the
vulgar Polyhymnia, who must be used with circumspection that the
pleasure be enjoyed, but may not generate licentiousness; just as in
my own art it is a great matter so to regulate the desires of the
epicure that he may gratify his tastes without the attendant evil of
disease. Whence I infer that in music, in medicine, in all other
things human as which as divine, both loves ought to be noted as far
as may be, for they are both present.
  The course of the seasons is also full of both these principles; and
when, as I was saying, the elements of hot and cold, moist and dry,
attain the harmonious love of one another and blend in temperance
and harmony, they bring to men, animals, and plants health and plenty,
and do them no harm; whereas the wanton love, getting the upper hand
and affecting the seasons of the year, is very destructive and
injurious, being the source of pestilence, and bringing many other
kinds of diseases on animals and plants; for hoar-frost and hail and
blight spring from the excesses and disorders of these elements of
love, which to know in relation to the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies and the seasons of the year is termed astronomy. Furthermore
all sacrifices and the whole province of divination, which is the
art of communion between gods and men-these, I say, are concerned with
the preservation of the good and the cure of the evil love. For all
manner of impiety is likely to ensue if, instead of accepting and
honouring and reverencing the harmonious love in all his actions, a
man honours the other love, whether in his feelings towards gods or
parents, towards the living or the dead. Wherefore the business of
divination is to see to these loves and to heal them, and divination
is the peacemaker of gods and men, working by a knowledge of the
religious or irreligious tendencies which exist in human loves. Such
is the great and mighty, or rather omnipotent force of love in
general. And the love, more especially, which is concerned with the
good, and which is perfected in company with temperance and justice,
whether among gods or men, has the greatest power, and is the source
of all our happiness and harmony, and makes us friends with the gods
who are above us, and with one another. I dare say that I too have
omitted several things which might be said in praise of Love, but this
was not intentional, and you, Aristophanes, may now supply the
omission or take some other line of commendation; for I perceive
that you are rid of the hiccough.
  Yes, said Aristophanes, who followed, the hiccough is gone; not,
however, until I applied the sneezing; and I wonder whether the
harmony of the body has a love of such noises and ticklings, for I
no sooner applied the sneezing than I was cured.
  Eryximachus said: Beware, friend Aristophanes, although you are
going to speak, you are making fun of me; and I shall have to watch
and see whether I cannot have a laugh at your expense, when you
might speak in peace.
  You are right, said Aristophanes, laughing. I will unsay my words;
but do you please not to watch me, as I fear that in the speech
which I am about to make, instead of others laughing with me, which is
to the manner born of our muse and would be all the better, I shall
only be laughed at by them.
  Do you expect to shoot your bolt and escape, Aristophanes? Well,
perhaps if you are very careful and bear in mind that you will be
called to account, I may be induced to let you off.
  Aristophanes professed to open another vein of discourse; he had a
mind to praise Love in another way, unlike that either of Pausanias or
Eryximachus. Mankind; he said, judging by their neglect of him, have
never, as I think, at all understood the power of Love. For if they
had understood him they would surely have built noble temples and
altars, and offered solemn sacrifices in his honour; but this is not
done, and most certainly ought to be done: since of all the gods he is
the best friend of men, the helper and the healer of the ills which
are the great impediment to the happiness of the race. I will try to
describe his power to you, and you shall teach the rest of the world
what I am teaching you. In the first place, let me treat of the nature
of man and what has happened to it; for the original human nature
was not like the present, but different. The sexes were not two as
they are now, but originally three in number; there was man, woman,
and the union of the two, having a name corresponding to this double
nature, which had once a real existence, but is now lost, and the word
"Androgynous" is only preserved as a term of reproach. In the second
place, the primeval man was round, his back and sides forming a
circle; and he had four hands and four feet, one head with two
faces, looking opposite ways, set on a round neck and precisely alike;
also four ears, two privy members, and the remainder to correspond. He
could walk upright as men now do, backwards or forwards as he pleased,
and he could also roll over and over at a great pace, turning on his
four hands and four feet, eight in all, like tumblers going over and
over with their legs in the air; this was when he wanted to run
fast. Now the sexes were three, and such as I have described them;
because the sun, moon, and earth are three;-and the man was originally
the child of the sun, the woman of the earth, and the man-woman of the
moon, which is made up of sun and earth, and they were all round and
moved round and round: like their parents. Terrible was their might
and strength, and the thoughts of their hearts were great, and they
made an attack upon the gods; of them is told the tale of Otys and
Ephialtes who, as Homer says, dared to scale heaven, and would have
laid hands upon the gods. Doubt reigned in the celestial councils.
Should they kill them and annihilate the race with thunderbolts, as
they had done the giants, then there would be an end of the sacrifices
and worship which men offered to them; but, on the other hand, the
gods could not suffer their insolence to be unrestrained.
  At last, after a good deal of reflection, Zeus discovered a way.
He said: "Methinks I have a plan which will humble their pride and
improve their manners; men shall continue to exist, but I will cut
them in two and then they will be diminished in strength and increased
in numbers; this will have the advantage of making them more
profitable to us. They shall walk upright on two legs, and if they
continue insolent and will not be quiet, I will split them again and
they shall hop about on a single leg." He spoke and cut men in two,
like a sorb-apple which is halved for pickling, or as you might divide
an egg with a hair; and as he cut them one after another, he bade
Apollo give the face and the half of the neck a turn in order that the
man might contemplate the section of himself: he would thus learn a
lesson of humility. Apollo was also bidden to heal their wounds and
compose their forms. So he gave a turn to the face and pulled the skin
from the sides all over that which in our language is called the
belly, like the purses which draw in, and he made one mouth at the
centre, which he fastened in a knot (the same which is called the
navel); he also moulded the breast and took out most of the
wrinkles, much as a shoemaker might smooth leather upon a last; he
left a few, however, in the region of the belly and navel, as a
memorial of the primeval state. After the division the two parts of
man, each desiring his other half, came together, and throwing their
arms about one another, entwined in mutual embraces, longing to grow
into one, they were on the point of dying from hunger and
self-neglect, because they did not like to do anything apart; and when
one of the halves died and the other survived, the survivor sought
another mate, man or woman as we call them, being the sections of
entire men or women, and clung to that. They were being destroyed,
when Zeus in pity of them invented a new plan: he turned the parts
of generation round to the front, for this had not been always their
position and they sowed the seed no longer as hitherto like
grasshoppers in the ground, but in one another; and after the
transposition the male generated in the female in order that by the
mutual embraces of man and woman they might breed, and the race
might continue; or if man came to man they might be satisfied, and
rest, and go their ways to the business of life: so ancient is the
desire of one another which is implanted in us, reuniting our original
nature, making one of two, and healing the state of man.
  Each of us when separated, having one side only, like a flat fish,
is but the indenture of a man, and he is always looking for his
other half. Men who are a section of that double nature which was once
called Androgynous are lovers of women; adulterers are generally of
this breed, and also adulterous women who lust after men: the women
who are a section of the woman do not care for men, but have female
attachments; the female companions are of this sort. But they who
are a section of the male follow the male, and while they are young,
being slices of the original man, they hang about men and embrace
them, and they are themselves the best of boys and youths, because
they have the most manly nature. Some indeed assert that they are
shameless, but this is not true; for they do not act thus from any
want of shame, but because they are valiant and manly, and have a
manly countenance, and they embrace that which is like them. And these
when they grow up become our statesmen, and these only, which is a
great proof of the truth of what I am saving. When they reach
manhood they are loves of youth, and are not naturally inclined to
marry or beget children,-if at all, they do so only in obedience to
the law; but they are satisfied if they may be allowed to live with
one another unwedded; and such a nature is prone to love and ready
to return love, always embracing that which is akin to him. And when
one of them meets with his other half, the actual half of himself,
whether he be a lover of youth or a lover of another sort, the pair
are lost in an amazement of love and friendship and intimacy, and
would not be out of the other's sight, as I may say, even for a
moment: these are the people who pass their whole lives together;
yet they could not explain what they desire of one another. For the
intense yearning which each of them has towards the other does not
appear to be the desire of lover's intercourse, but of something
else which the soul of either evidently desires and cannot tell, and
of which she has only a dark and doubtful presentiment. Suppose
Hephaestus, with his instruments, to come to the pair who are lying
side, by side and to say to them, "What do you people want of one
another?" they would be unable to explain. And suppose further, that
when he saw their perplexity he said: "Do you desire to be wholly one;
always day and night to be in one another's company? for if this is
what you desire, I am ready to melt you into one and let you grow
together, so that being two you shall become one, and while you live a
common life as if you were a single man, and after your death in the
world below still be one departed soul instead of two-I ask whether
this is what you lovingly desire, and whether you are satisfied to
attain this?"-there is not a man of them who when he heard the
proposal would deny or would not acknowledge that this meeting and
melting into one another, this becoming one instead of two, was the
very expression of his ancient need. And the reason is that human
nature was originally one and we were a whole, and the desire and
pursuit of the whole is called love. There was a time, I say, when
we were one, but now because of the wickedness of mankind God has
dispersed us, as the Arcadians were dispersed into villages by the
Lacedaemonians. And if we are not obedient to the gods, there is a
danger that we shall be split up again and go about in
basso-relievo, like the profile figures having only half a nose
which are sculptured on monuments, and that we shall be like tallies.
  Wherefore let us exhort all men to piety, that we may avoid evil,
and obtain the good, of which Love is to us the lord and minister; and
let no one oppose him-he is the enemy of the gods who oppose him.
For if we are friends of the God and at peace with him we shall find
our own true loves, which rarely happens in this world at present. I
am serious, and therefore I must beg Eryximachus not to make fun or to
find any allusion in what I am saying to Pausanias and Agathon, who,
as I suspect, are both of the manly nature, and belong to the class
which I have been describing. But my words have a wider
application-they include men and women everywhere; and I believe
that if our loves were perfectly accomplished, and each one
returning to his primeval nature had his original true love, then
our race would be happy. And if this would be best of all, the best in
the next degree and under present circumstances must be the nearest
approach to such an union; and that will be the attainment of a
congenial love. Wherefore, if we would praise him who has given to
us the benefit, we must praise the god Love, who is our greatest
benefactor, both leading us in this life back to our own nature, and
giving us high hopes for the future, for he promises that if we are
pious, he will restore us to our original state, and heal us and
make us happy and blessed. This, Eryximachus, is my discourse of love,
which, although different to yours, I must beg you to leave unassailed
by the shafts of your ridicule, in order that each may have his
turn; each, or rather either, for Agathon and Socrates are the only
ones left.
  Indeed, I am not going to attack you, said Eryximachus, for I
thought your speech charming, and did I not know that Agathon and
Socrates are masters in the art of love, I should be really afraid
that they would have nothing to say, after the world of things which
have been said already. But, for all that, I am not without hopes.
  Socrates said: You played your part well, Eryximachus; but if you
were as I am now, or rather as I shall be when Agathon has spoken, you
would, indeed, be in a great strait.
  You want to cast a spell over me, Socrates, said Agathon, in the
hope that I may be disconcerted at the expectation raised among the
audience that I shall speak well.
  I should be strangely forgetful, Agathon replied Socrates, of the
courage and magnanimity which you showed when your own compositions
were about to be exhibited, and you came upon the stage with the
actors and faced the vast theatre altogether undismayed, if I
thought that your nerves could be fluttered at a small party of
friends.
  Do you think, Socrates, said Agathon, that my head is so full of the
theatre as not to know how much more formidable to a man of sense a
few good judges are than many fools?
  Nay, replied Socrates, I should be very wrong in attributing to you,
Agathon, that or any other want of refinement. And I am quite aware
that if you happened to meet with any whom you thought wise, you would
care for their opinion much more than for that of the many. But then
we, having been a part of the foolish many in the theatre, cannot be
regarded as the select wise; though I know that if you chanced to be
in the presence, not of one of ourselves, but of some really wise man,
you would be ashamed of disgracing yourself before him-would you not?
  Yes, said Agathon.
  But before the many you would not be ashamed, if you thought that
you were doing something disgraceful in their presence?
  Here Phaedrus interrupted them, saying: not answer him, my dear
Agathon; for if he can only get a partner with whom he can talk,
especially a good-looking one, he will no longer care about the
completion of our plan. Now I love to hear him talk; but just at
present I must not forget the encomium on Love which I ought to
receive from him and from every one. When you and he have paid your
tribute to the god, then you may talk.
  Very good, Phaedrus, said Agathon; I see no reason why I should
not proceed with my speech, as I shall have many other opportunities
of conversing with Socrates. Let me say first how I ought to speak,
and then speak:-
  The previous speakers, instead of praising the god Love, or
unfolding his nature, appear to have congratulated mankind on the
benefits which he confers upon them. But I would rather praise the god
first, and then speak of his gifts; this is always the right way of
praising everything. May I say without impiety or offence, that of all
the blessed gods he is the most blessed because he is the fairest
and best? And he is the fairest: for, in the first place, he is the
youngest, and of his youth he is himself the witness, fleeing out of
the way of age, who is swift enough, swifter truly than most of us
like:-Love hates him and will not come near him; but youth and love
live and move together-like to like, as the proverb says. Many
things were said by Phaedrus about Love in which I agree with him; but
I cannot agree that he is older than Iapetus and Kronos:-not so; I
maintain him to be the youngest of the gods, and youthful ever. The
ancient doings among the gods of which Hesiod and Parmenides spoke, if
the tradition of them be true, were done of Necessity and not Love;
had Love been in those days, there would have been no chaining or
mutilation of the gods, or other violence, but peace and sweetness, as
there is now in heaven, since the rule of Love began.
  Love is young and also tender; he ought to have a poet like Homer to
describe his tenderness, as Homer says of Ate, that she is a goddess
and tender:

     Her feet are tender, for she sets her steps,
     Not on the ground but on the heads of men:

herein is an excellent proof of her tenderness that,-she walks not
upon the hard but upon the soft. Let us adduce a similar proof of
the tenderness of Love; for he walks not upon the earth, nor yet
upon skulls of men, which are not so very soft, but in the hearts
and souls of both god, and men, which are of all things the softest:
in them he walks and dwells and makes his home. Not in every soul
without exception, for Where there is hardness he departs, where there
is softness there he dwells; and nestling always with his feet and
in all manner of ways in the softest of soft places, how can he be
other than the softest of all things? Of a truth he is the tenderest
as well as the youngest, and also he is of flexile form; for if he
were hard and without flexure he could not enfold all things, or
wind his way into and out of every soul of man undiscovered. And a
proof of his flexibility and symmetry of form is his grace, which is
universally admitted to be in an especial manner the attribute of
Love; ungrace and love are always at war with one another. The
fairness of his complexion is revealed by his habitation among the
flowers; for he dwells not amid bloomless or fading beauties,
whether of body or soul or aught else, but in the place of flowers and
scents, there he sits and abides. Concerning the beauty of the god I
have said enough; and yet there remains much more which I might say.
Of his virtue I have now to speak: his greatest glory is that he can
neither do nor suffer wrong to or from any god or any man; for he
suffers not by force if he suffers; force comes not near him,
neither when he acts does he act by force. For all men in all things
serve him of their own free will, and where there is voluntary
agreement, there, as the laws which are the lords of the city say,
is justice. And not only is he just but exceedingly temperate, for
Temperance is the acknowledged ruler of the pleasures and desires, and
no pleasure ever masters Love; he is their master and they are his
servants; and if he conquers them he must be temperate indeed. As to
courage, even the God of War is no match for him; he is the captive
and Love is the lord, for love, the love of Aphrodite, masters him, as
the tale runs; and the master is stronger than the servant. And if
he conquers the bravest of all others, he must be himself the bravest.
  Of his courage and justice and temperance I have spoken, but I
have yet to speak of his wisdom-and according to the measure of my
ability I must try to do my best. In the first place he is a poet (and
here, like Eryximachus, I magnify my art), and he is also the source
of poesy in others, which he could not be if he were not himself a
poet. And at the touch of him every one becomes a poet, even though he
had no music in him before; this also is a proof that Love is a good
poet and accomplished in all the fine arts; for no one can give to
another that which he has not himself, or teach that of which he has
no knowledge. Who will deny that the creation of the animals is his
doing? Are they not all the works his wisdom, born and begotten of
him? And as to the artists, do we not know that he only of them whom
love inspires has the light of fame?-he whom Love touches riot walks
in darkness. The arts of medicine and archery and divination were
discovered by Apollo, under the guidance of love and desire; so that
he too is a disciple of Love. Also the melody of the Muses, the
metallurgy of Hephaestus, the weaving of Athene, the empire of Zeus
over gods and men, are all due to Love, who was the inventor of
them. And so Love set in order the empire of the gods-the love of
beauty, as is evident, for with deformity Love has no concern. In
the days of old, as I began by saying, dreadful deeds were done
among the gods, for they were ruled by Necessity; but now since the
birth of Love, and from the Love of the beautiful, has sprung every
good in heaven and earth. Therefore, Phaedrus, I say of Love that he
is the fairest and best in himself, and the cause of what is fairest
and best in all other things. And there comes into my mind a line of
poetry in which he is said to be the god who

     Gives peace on earth and calms the stormy deep,
     Who stills the winds and bids the sufferer sleep.

This is he who empties men of disaffection and fills them with
affection, who makes them to meet together at banquets such as
these: in sacrifices, feasts, dances, he is our lord-who sends
courtesy and sends away discourtesy, who gives kindness ever and never
gives unkindness; the friend of the good, the wonder of the wise,
the amazement of the gods; desired by those who have no part in him,
and precious to those who have the better part in him; parent of
delicacy, luxury, desire, fondness, softness, grace; regardful of
the good, regardless of the evil: in every word, work, wish,
fear-saviour, pilot, comrade, helper; glory of gods and men, leader
best and brightest: in whose footsteps let every man follow, sweetly
singing in his honour and joining in that sweet strain with which love
charms the souls of gods and men. Such is the speech, Phaedrus,
half-playful, yet having a certain measure of seriousness, which,
according to my ability, I dedicate to the god.
  When Agathon had done speaking, Aristodemus said that there was a
general cheer; the young man was thought to have spoken in a manner
worthy of himself, and of the god. And Socrates, looking at
Eryximachus, said: Tell me, son of Acumenus, was there not reason in
my fears? and was I not a true prophet when I said that Agathon
would make a wonderful oration, and that I should be in a strait?
  The part of the prophecy which concerns Agathon, replied
Eryximachus, appears to me to be true; but, not the other part-that
you will be in a strait.
  Why, my dear friend, said Socrates, must not I or any one be in a
strait who has to speak after he has heard such a rich and varied
discourse? I am especially struck with the beauty of the concluding
words-who could listen to them without amazement? When I reflected
on the immeasurable inferiority of my own powers, I was ready to run
away for shame, if there had been a possibility of escape. For I was
reminded of Gorgias, and at the end of his speech I fancied that
Agathon was shaking at me the Gorginian or Gorgonian head of the great
master of rhetoric, which was simply to turn me and my speech, into
stone, as Homer says, and strike me dumb. And then I perceived how
foolish I had been in consenting to take my turn with you in
praising love, and saying that I too was a master of the art, when I
really had no conception how anything ought to be praised. For in my
simplicity I imagined that the topics of praise should be true, and
that this being presupposed, out of the true the speaker was to choose
the best and set them forth in the best manner. And I felt quite
proud, thinking that I knew the nature of true praise, and should
speak well. Whereas I now see that the intention was to attribute to
Love every species of greatness and glory, whether really belonging to
him not, without regard to truth or falsehood-that was no matter;
for the original, proposal seems to have been not that each of you
should really praise Love, but only that you should appear to praise
him. And so you attribute to Love every imaginable form of praise
which can be gathered anywhere; and you say that "he is all this," and
"the cause of all that," making him appear the fairest and best of all
to those who know him not, for you cannot impose upon those who know
him. And a noble and solemn hymn of praise have you rehearsed. But
as I misunderstood the nature of the praise when I said that I would
take my turn, I must beg to be absolved from the promise which I
made in ignorance, and which (as Euripides would say) was a promise of
the lips and not of the mind. Farewell then to such a strain: for I do
not praise in that way; no, indeed, I cannot. But if you like to
here the truth about love, I am ready to speak in my own manner,
though I will not make myself ridiculous by entering into any
rivalry with you. Say then, Phaedrus, whether you would like, to
have the truth about love, spoken in any words and in any order
which may happen to come into my mind at the time. Will that be
agreeable to you?
  Aristodemus said that Phaedrus and the company bid him speak in
any manner which he thought best. Then, he added, let me have your
permission first to ask Agathon a few more questions, in order that
I may take his admissions as the premisses of my discourse.
  I grant the permission, said Phaedrus: put your questions.
Socrates then proceeded as follows:-
  In the magnificent oration which you have just uttered, I think that
you were right, my dear Agathon, in proposing to speak of the nature
of Love first and afterwards of his works-that is a way of beginning
which I very much approve. And as you have spoken so eloquently of his
nature, may I ask you further, Whether love is the love of something
or of nothing? And here I must explain myself: I do not want you to
say that love is the love of a father or the love of a mother-that
would be ridiculous; but to answer as you would, if I asked is a
father a father of something? to which you would find no difficulty in
replying, of a son or daughter: and the answer would be right.
  Very true, said Agathon.
  And you would say the same of a mother?
  He assented.
  Yet let me ask you one more question in order to illustrate my
meaning: Is not a brother to be regarded essentially as a brother of
something?
  Certainly, he replied.
  That is, of a brother or sister?
  Yes, he said.
  And now, said Socrates, I will ask about Love:-Is Love of
something or of nothing?
  Of something, surely, he replied.
  Keep in mind what this is, and tell me what I want to know-whether
Love desires that of which love is.
  Yes, surely.
  And does he possess, or does he not possess, that which he loves and
desires?
  Probably not, I should say.
  Nay, replied Socrates, I would have you consider whether
"necessarily" is not rather the word. The inference that he who
desires something is in want of something, and that he who desires
nothing is in want of nothing, is in my judgment, Agathon absolutely
and necessarily true. What do you think?
  I agree with you, said Agathon.
  Very good. Would he who is great, desire to be great, or he who is
strong, desire to be strong?
  That would be inconsistent with our previous admissions.
  True. For he who is anything cannot want to be that which he is?
  Very true.
  And yet, added Socrates, if a man being strong desired to be strong,
or being swift desired to be swift, or being healthy desired to be
healthy, in that case he might be thought to desire something which he
already has or is. I give the example in order that we may avoid
misconception. For the possessors of these qualities, Agathon, must be
supposed to have their respective advantages at the time, whether they
choose or not; and who can desire that which he has? Therefore when
a person says, I am well and wish to be well, or I am rich and wish to
be rich, and I desire simply to have what I have-to him we shall
reply: "You, my friend, having wealth and health and strength, want to
have the continuance of them; for at this moment, whether you choose
or no, you have them. And when you say, I desire that which I have and
nothing else, is not your meaning that you want to have what you now
have in the future? "He must agree with us-must he not?
  He must, replied Agathon.
  Then, said Socrates, he desires that what he has at present may be
preserved to him in the future, which is equivalent to saying that
he desires something which is non-existent to him, and which as yet he
has not got.
  Very true, he said.
  Then he and every one who desires, desires that which he has not
already, and which is future and not present, and which he has not,
and is not, and of which he is in want;-these are the sort of things
which love and desire seek?
  Very true, he said.
  Then now, said Socrates, let us recapitulate the argument. First, is
not love of something, and of something too which is wanting to a man?
  Yes, he replied.
  Remember further what you said in your speech, or if you do not
remember I will remind you: you said that the love of the beautiful
set in order the empire of the gods, for that of deformed things there
is no love-did you not say something of that kind?
  Yes, said Agathon.
  Yes, my friend, and the remark was a just one. And if this is
true, Love is the love of beauty and not of deformity?
  He assented.
  And the admission has been already made that Love is of something
which a man wants and has not?
  True, he said.
  Then Love wants and has not beauty?
  Certainly, he replied.
  And would you call that beautiful which wants and does not possess
beauty?
  Certainly not.
  Then would you still say that love is beautiful?
  Agathon replied: I fear that I did not understand what I was saying.
  You made a very good speech, Agathon, replied Socrates; but there is
yet one small question which I would fain ask:-Is not the good also
the beautiful?
  Yes.
  Then in wanting the beautiful, love wants also the good?
  I cannot refute you, Socrates, said Agathon:-Let us assume that what
you say is true.
  Say rather, beloved Agathon, that you cannot refute the truth; for
Socrates is easily refuted.
  And now, taking my leave of you, I would rehearse a tale of love
which I heard from Diotima of Mantineia, a woman wise in this and in
many other kinds of knowledge, who in the days of old, when the
Athenians offered sacrifice before the coming of the plague, delayed
the disease ten years. She was my instructress in the art of love, and
I shall repeat to you what she said to me, beginning with the
admissions made by Agathon, which are nearly if not quite the same
which I made to the wise woman when she questioned me-I think that
this will be the easiest way, and I shall take both parts myself as
well as I can. As you, Agathon, suggested, I must speak first of the
being and nature of Love, and then of his works. First I said to her
in nearly the same words which he used to me, that Love was a mighty
god, and likewise fair and she proved to me as I proved to him that,
by my own showing, Love was neither fair nor good. "What do you
mean, Diotima," I said, "is love then evil and foul?" "Hush," she
cried; "must that be foul which is not fair?" "Certainly," I said.
"And is that which is not wise, ignorant? do you not see that there is
a mean between wisdom and ignorance?" "And what may that be?" I
said. "Right opinion," she replied; "which, as you know, being
incapable of giving a reason, is not knowledge (for how can
knowledge be devoid of reason? nor again, ignorance, for neither can
ignorance attain the truth), but is clearly something which is a
mean between ignorance and wisdom." "Quite true," I replied. "Do not
then insist," she said, "that what is not fair is of necessity foul,
or what is not good evil; or infer that because love is not fair and
good he is therefore foul and evil; for he is in a mean between them."
"Well," I said, "Love is surely admitted by all to be a great god."
"By those who know or by those who do not know?" "By all." "And how,
Socrates," she said with a smile, "can Love be acknowledged to be a
great god by those who say that he is not a god at all?" "And who
are they?" I said. "You and I are two of them," she replied. "How
can that be?" I said. "It is quite intelligible," she replied; "for
you yourself would acknowledge that the gods are happy and fair of
course you would-would to say that any god was not?" "Certainly
not," I replied. "And you mean by the happy, those who are the
possessors of things good or fair?" "Yes." "And you admitted that
Love, because he was in want, desires those good and fair things of
which he is in want?" "Yes, I did." "But how can he be a god who has
no portion in what is either good or fair?" "Impossible." "Then you
see that you also deny the divinity of Love."
  "What then is Love?" I asked; "Is he mortal?" "No." "What then?" "As
in the former instance, he is neither mortal nor immortal, but in a
mean between the two." "What is he, Diotima?" "He is a great spirit
(daimon), and like all spirits he is intermediate between the divine
and the mortal." "And what," I said, "is his power?" "He
interprets," she replied, "between gods and men, conveying and
taking across to the gods the prayers and sacrifices of men, and to
men the commands and replies of the gods; he is the mediator who spans
the chasm which divides them, and therefore in him all is bound
together, and through him the arts of the prophet and the priest,
their sacrifices and mysteries and charms, and all, prophecy and
incantation, find their way. For God mingles not with man; but through
Love. all the intercourse, and converse of god with man, whether awake
or asleep, is carried on. The wisdom which understands this is
spiritual; all other wisdom, such as that of arts and handicrafts,
is mean and vulgar. Now these spirits or intermediate powers are
many and diverse, and one of them is Love. "And who," I said, "was his
father, and who his mother?" "The tale," she said, "will take time;
nevertheless I will tell you. On the birthday of Aphrodite there was a
feast of the gods, at which the god Poros or Plenty, who is the son of
Metis or Discretion, was one of the guests. When the feast was over,
Penia or Poverty, as the manner is on such occasions, came about the
doors to beg. Now Plenty who was the worse for nectar (there was no
wine in those days), went into the garden of Zeus and fell into a
heavy sleep, and Poverty considering her own straitened circumstances,
plotted to have a child by him, and accordingly she lay down at his
side and conceived love, who partly because he is naturally a lover of
the beautiful, and because Aphrodite is herself beautiful, and also
because he was born on her birthday, is her follower and attendant.
And as his parentage is, so also are his fortunes. In the first
place he is always poor, and anything but tender and fair, as the many
imagine him; and he is rough and squalid, and has no shoes, nor a
house to dwell in; on the bare earth exposed he lies under the open
heaven, in-the streets, or at the doors of houses, taking his rest;
and like his mother he is always in distress. Like his father too,
whom he also partly resembles, he is always plotting against the
fair and good; he is bold, enterprising, strong, a mighty hunter,
always weaving some intrigue or other, keen in the pursuit of
wisdom, fertile in resources; a philosopher at all times, terrible
as an enchanter, sorcerer, sophist. He is by nature neither mortal nor
immortal, but alive and flourishing at one moment when he is in
plenty, and dead at another moment, and again alive by reason of his
father's nature. But that which is always flowing in is always flowing
out, and so he is never in want and never in wealth; and, further,
he is in a mean between ignorance and knowledge. The truth of the
matter is this: No god is a philosopher. or seeker after wisdom, for
he is wise already; nor does any man who is wise seek after wisdom.
Neither do the ignorant seek after Wisdom. For herein is the evil of
ignorance, that he who is neither good nor wise is nevertheless
satisfied with himself: he has no desire for that of which he feels no
want." "But-who then, Diotima," I said, "are the lovers of wisdom,
if they are neither the wise nor the foolish?" "A child may answer
that question," she replied; "they are those who are in a mean between
the two; Love is one of them. For wisdom is a most beautiful thing,
and Love is of the beautiful; and therefore Love is also a
philosopher: or lover of wisdom, and being a lover of wisdom is in a
mean between the wise and the ignorant. And of this too his birth is
the cause; for his father is wealthy and wise, and his mother poor and
foolish. Such, my dear Socrates, is the nature of the spirit Love. The
error in your conception of him was very natural, and as I imagine
from what you say, has arisen out of a confusion of love and the
beloved, which made you think that love was all beautiful. For the
beloved is the truly beautiful, and delicate, and perfect, and
blessed; but the principle of love is of another nature, and is such
as I have described."
  I said, "O thou stranger woman, thou sayest well; but, assuming Love
to be such as you say, what is the use of him to men?" "That,
Socrates," she replied, "I will attempt to unfold: of his nature and
birth I have already spoken; and you acknowledge that love is of the
beautiful. But some one will say: Of the beautiful in what, Socrates
and Diotima?-or rather let me put the question more dearly, and ask:
When a man loves the beautiful, what does he desire?" I answered her
"That the beautiful may be his." "Still," she said, "the answer
suggests a further question: What is given by the possession of
beauty?" "To what you have asked," I replied, "I have no answer
ready." "Then," she said, "Let me put the word 'good' in the place
of the beautiful, and repeat the question once more: If he who loves
good, what is it then that he loves? "The possession of the good," I
said. "And what does he gain who possesses the good?" "Happiness," I
replied; "there is less difficulty in answering that question." "Yes,"
she said, "the happy are made happy by the acquisition of good things.
Nor is there any need to ask why a man desires happiness; the answer
is already final." "You are right." I said. "And is this wish and this
desire common to all? and do all men always desire their own good,
or only some men?-what say you?" "All men," I replied; "the desire
is common to all." "Why, then," she rejoined, "are not all men,
Socrates, said to love, but only some them? whereas you say that all
men are always loving the same things." "I myself wonder," I said,-why
this is." "There is nothing to wonder at," she replied; "the reason is
that one part of love is separated off and receives the name of the
whole, but the other parts have other names." "Give an
illustration," I said. She answered me as follows: "There is poetry,
which, as you know, is complex; and manifold. All creation or
passage of non-being into being is poetry or making, and the processes
of all art are creative; and the masters of arts are all poets or
makers." "Very true." "Still," she said, "you know that they are not
called poets, but have other names; only that portion of the art which
is separated off from the rest, and is concerned with music and metre,
is termed poetry, and they who possess poetry in this sense of the
word are called poets." "Very true," I said. "And the same holds of
love. For you may say generally that all desire of good and
happiness is only the great and subtle power of love; but they who are
drawn towards him by any other path, whether the path of
money-making or gymnastics or philosophy, are not called lovers -the
name of the whole is appropriated to those whose affection takes one
form only-they alone are said to love, or to be lovers." "I dare say,"
I replied, "that you are right." "Yes," she added, "and you hear
people say that lovers are seeking for their other half; but I say
that they are seeking neither for the half of themselves, nor for
the whole, unless the half or the whole be also a good. And they
will cut off their own hands and feet and cast them away, if they
are evil; for they love not what is their own, unless perchance
there be some one who calls what belongs to him the good, and what
belongs to another the evil. For there is nothing which men love but
the good. Is there anything?" "Certainly, I should say, that there
is nothing." "Then," she said, "the simple truth is, that men love the
good." "Yes," I said. "To which must be added that they love the
possession of the good? "Yes, that must be added." "And not only the
possession, but the everlasting possession of the good?" "That must be
added too." "Then love," she said, "may be described generally as
the love of the everlasting possession of the good?" "That is most
true."
  "Then if this be the nature of love, can you tell me further," she
said, "what is the manner of the pursuit? what are they doing who show
all this eagerness and heat which is called love? and what is the
object which they have in view? Answer me." "Nay, Diotima," I replied,
"if I had known, I should not have wondered at your wisdom, neither
should I have come to learn from you about this very matter."
"Well," she said, "I will teach you:-The object which they have in
view is birth in beauty, whether of body or, soul." "I do not
understand you," I said; "the oracle requires an explanation." "I will
make my meaning dearer," she replied. "I mean to say, that all men are
bringing to the birth in their bodies and in their souls. There is a
certain age at which human nature is desirous of
procreation-procreation which must be in beauty and not in
deformity; and this procreation is the union of man and woman, and
is a divine thing; for conception and generation are an immortal
principle in the mortal creature, and in the inharmonious they can
never be. But the deformed is always inharmonious with the divine, and
the beautiful harmonious. Beauty, then, is the destiny or goddess of
parturition who presides at birth, and therefore, when approaching
beauty, the conceiving power is propitious, and diffusive, and benign,
and begets and bears fruit: at the sight of ugliness she frowns and
contracts and has a sense of pain, and turns away, and shrivels up,
and not without a pang refrains from conception. And this is the
reason why, when the hour of conception arrives, and the teeming
nature is full, there is such a flutter and ecstasy about beauty whose
approach is the alleviation of the pain of travail. For love,
Socrates, is not, as you imagine, the love of the beautiful only."
"What then?" "The love of generation and of birth in beauty." "Yes," I
said. "Yes, indeed," she replied. "But why of generation?" "Because to
the mortal creature, generation is a sort of eternity and
immortality," she replied; "and if, as has been already admitted, love
is of the everlasting possession of the good, all men will necessarily
desire immortality together with good: Wherefore love is of
immortality."
  All this she taught me at various times when she spoke of love.
And I remember her once saying to me, "What is the cause, Socrates, of
love, and the attendant desire? See you not how all animals, birds, as
well as beasts, in their desire of procreation, are in agony when they
take the infection of love, which begins with the desire of union;
whereto is added the care of offspring, on whose behalf the weakest
are ready to battle against the strongest even to the uttermost, and
to die for them, and will, let themselves be tormented with hunger
or suffer anything in order to maintain their young. Man may be
supposed to act thus from reason; but why should animals have these
passionate feelings? Can you tell me why?" Again I replied that I
did not know. She said to me: "And do you expect ever to become a
master in the art of love, if you do not know this?" "But I have
told you already, Diotima, that my ignorance is the reason why I
come to you; for I am conscious that I want a teacher; tell me then
the cause of this and of the other mysteries of love." "Marvel not,"
she said, "if you believe that love is of the immortal, as we have
several times acknowledged; for here again, and on the same
principle too, the mortal nature is seeking as far as is possible to
be everlasting and immortal: and this is only to be attained by
generation, because generation always leaves behind a new existence in
the place of the old. Nay even in the life, of the same individual
there is succession and not absolute unity: a man is called the
same, and yet in the short interval which elapses between youth and
age, and in which every animal is said to have life and identity, he
is undergoing a perpetual process of loss and reparation-hair,
flesh, bones, blood, and the whole body are always changing. Which
is true not only of the body, but also of the soul, whose habits,
tempers, opinions, desires, pleasures, pains, fears, never remain
the same in any one of us, but are always coming and going; and
equally true of knowledge, and what is still more surprising to us
mortals, not only do the sciences in general spring up and decay, so
that in respect of them we are never the same; but each of them
individually experiences a like change. For what is implied in the
word 'recollection,' but the departure of knowledge, which is ever
being forgotten, and is renewed and preserved by recollection, and
appears to be the same although in reality new, according to that
law of succession by which all mortal things are preserved, not
absolutely the same, but by substitution, the old worn-out mortality
leaving another new and similar existence behind unlike the divine,
which is always the same and not another? And in this way, Socrates,
the mortal body, or mortal anything, partakes of immortality; but
the immortal in another way. Marvel not then at the love which all men
have of their offspring; for that universal love and interest is for
the sake of immortality."
  I was astonished at her words, and said: "Is this really true, O
thou wise Diotima?" And she answered with all the authority of an
accomplished sophist: "Of that, Socrates, you may be assured;-think
only of the ambition of men, and you will wonder at the
senselessness of their ways, unless you consider how they are
stirred by the love of an immortality of fame. They are ready to run
all risks greater far than they would have for their children, and
to spend money and undergo any sort of toil, and even to die, for
the sake of leaving behind them a name which shall be eternal. Do
you imagine that Alcestis would have died to save Admetus, or Achilles
to avenge Patroclus, or your own Codrus in order to preserve the
kingdom for his sons, if they had not imagined that the memory of
their virtues, which still survives among us, would be immortal? Nay,"
she said, "I am persuaded that all men do all things, and the better
they are the more they do them, in hope of the glorious fame of
immortal virtue; for they desire the immortal.
  "Those who are pregnant in the body only, betake themselves to women
and beget children-this is the character of their love; their
offspring, as they hope, will preserve their memory and giving them
the blessedness and immortality which they desire in the future. But
souls which are pregnant-for there certainly are men who are more
creative in their souls than in their bodies conceive that which is
proper for the soul to conceive or contain. And what are these
conceptions?-wisdom and virtue in general. And such creators are poets
and all artists who are deserving of the name inventor. But the
greatest and fairest sort of wisdom by far is that which is
concerned with the ordering of states and families, and which is
called temperance and justice. And he who in youth has the seed of
these implanted in him and is himself inspired, when he comes to
maturity desires to beget and generate. He wanders about seeking
beauty that he may beget offspring-for in deformity he will beget
nothing-and naturally embraces the beautiful rather than the
deformed body; above all when he finds fair and noble and
well-nurtured soul, he embraces the two in one person, and to such
an one he is full of speech about virtue and the nature and pursuits
of a good man; and he tries to educate him; and at the touch of the
beautiful which is ever present to his memory, even when absent, he
brings forth that which he had conceived long before, and in company
with him tends that which he brings forth; and they are married by a
far nearer tie and have a closer friendship than those who beget
mortal children, for the children who are their common offspring are
fairer and more immortal. Who, when he thinks of Homer and Hesiod
and other great poets, would not rather have their children than
ordinary human ones? Who would not emulate them in the creation of
children such as theirs, which have preserved their memory and given
them everlasting glory? Or who would not have such children as
Lycurgus left behind him to be the saviours, not only of Lacedaemon,
but of Hellas, as one may say? There is Solon, too, who is the revered
father of Athenian laws; and many others there are in many other
places, both among hellenes and barbarians, who have given to the
world many noble works, and have been the parents of virtue of every
kind; and many temples have been raised in their honour for the sake
of children such as theirs; which were never raised in honour of any
one, for the sake of his mortal children.
  "These are the lesser mysteries of love, into which even you,
Socrates, may enter; to the greater and more hidden ones which are the
crown of these, and to which, if you pursue them in a right spirit,
they will lead, I know not whether you will be able to attain. But I
will do my utmost to inform you, and do you follow if you can. For
he who would proceed aright in this matter should begin in youth to
visit beautiful forms; and first, if he be guided by his instructor
aright, to love one such form only-out of that he should create fair
thoughts; and soon he will of himself perceive that the beauty of
one form is akin to the beauty of another; and then if beauty of
form in general is his pursuit, how foolish would he be not to
recognize that the beauty in every form is and the same! And when he
perceives this he will abate his violent love of the one, which he
will despise and deem a small thing, and will become a lover of all
beautiful forms; in the next stage he will consider that the beauty of
the mind is more honourable than the beauty of the outward form. So
that if a virtuous soul have but a little comeliness, he will be
content to love and tend him, and will search out and bring to the
birth thoughts which may improve the young, until he is compelled to
contemplate and see the beauty of institutions and laws, and to
understand that the beauty of them all is of one family, and that
personal beauty is a trifle; and after laws and institutions he will
go on to the sciences, that he may see their beauty, being not like
a servant in love with the beauty of one youth or man or
institution, himself a slave mean and narrow-minded, but drawing
towards and contemplating the vast sea of beauty, he will create
many fair and noble thoughts and notions in boundless love of
wisdom; until on that shore he grows and waxes strong, and at last the
vision is revealed to him of a single science, which is the science of
beauty everywhere. To this I will proceed; please to give me your very
best attention:
  "He who has been instructed thus far in the things of love, and
who has learned to see the beautiful in due order and succession, when
he comes toward the end will suddenly perceive a nature of wondrous
beauty (and this, Socrates, is the final cause of all our former
toils)-a nature which in the first place is everlasting, not growing
and decaying, or waxing and waning; secondly, not fair in one point of
view and foul in another, or at one time or in one relation or at
one place fair, at another time or in another relation or at another
place foul, as if fair to some and-foul to others, or in the
likeness of a face or hands or any other part of the bodily frame,
or in any form of speech or knowledge, or existing in any other being,
as for example, in an animal, or in heaven or in earth, or in any
other place; but beauty absolute, separate, simple, and everlasting,
which without diminution and without increase, or any change, is
imparted to the ever-growing and perishing beauties of all other
things. He who from these ascending under the influence of true
love, begins to perceive that beauty, is not far from the end. And the
true order of going, or being led by another, to the things of love,
is to begin from the beauties of earth and mount upwards for the
sake of that other beauty, using these as steps only, and from one
going on to two, and from two to all fair forms, and from fair forms
to fair practices, and from fair practices to fair notions, until from
fair notions he arrives at the notion of absolute beauty, and at
last knows what the essence of beauty is. This, my dear Socrates,"
said the stranger of Mantineia, "is that life above all others which
man should live, in the contemplation of beauty absolute; a beauty
which if you once beheld, you would see not to be after the measure of
gold, and garments, and fair boys and youths, whose presence now
entrances you; and you and many a one would be content to live
seeing them only and conversing with them without meat or drink, if
that were possible-you only want to look at them and to be with
them. But what if man had eyes to see the true beauty-the divine
beauty, I mean, pure and dear and unalloyed, not clogged with the
pollutions of mortality and all the colours and vanities of human
life-thither looking, and holding converse with the true beauty simple
and divine? Remember how in that communion only, beholding beauty with
the eye of the mind, he will be enabled to bring forth, not images
of beauty, but realities (for he has hold not of an image but of a
reality), and bringing forth and nourishing true virtue to become
the friend of God and be immortal, if mortal man may. Would that be an
ignoble life?"
  Such, Phaedrus-and I speak not only to you, but to all of you-were
the words of Diotima; and I am persuaded of their truth. And being
persuaded of them, I try to persuade others, that in the attainment of
this end human nature will not easily find a helper better than
love: And therefore, also, I say that every man ought to honour him as
I myself honour him, and walk in his ways, and exhort others to do the
same, and praise the power and spirit of love according to the measure
of my ability now and ever.
  The words which I have spoken, you, Phaedrus, may call an encomium
of love, or anything else which you please.
  When Socrates had done speaking, the company applauded, and
Aristophanes was beginning to say something in answer to the
allusion which Socrates had made to his own speech, when suddenly
there was a great knocking at the door of the house, as of
revellers, and the sound of a flute-girl was heard. Agathon told the
attendants to go and see who were the intruders. "If they are
friends of ours," he said, "invite them in, but if not, say that the
drinking is over." A little while afterwards they heard the voice of
Alcibiades resounding in the court; he was in a great state of
intoxication and kept roaring and shouting "Where is Agathon? Lead
me to Agathon," and at length, supported by the flute-girl and some of
his attendants, he found his way to them. "Hail, friends," he said,
appearing-at the door crown, with a massive garland of ivy and
violets, his head flowing with ribands. "Will you have a very
drunken man as a companion of your revels? Or shall I crown Agathon,
which was my intention in coming, and go away? For I was unable to
come yesterday, and therefore I am here to-day, carrying on my head
these ribands, that taking them from my own head, I may crown the head
of this fairest and wisest of men, as I may be allowed to call him.
Will you laugh at me because I am drunk? Yet I know very well that I
am speaking the truth, although you may laugh. But first tell me; if I
come in shall we have the understanding of which I spoke? Will you
drink with me or not?"
  The company were vociferous in begging that he would take his
place among them, and Agathon specially invited him. Thereupon he
was led in by the people who were with him; and as he was being led,
intending to crown Agathon, he took the ribands from his own head
and held them in front of his eyes; he was thus prevented from
seeing Socrates, who made way for him, and Alcibiades took the
vacant place between Agathon and Socrates, and in taking the place
he embraced Agathon and crowned him. Take off his sandals, said
Agathon, and let him make a third on the same couch.
  By all means; but who makes the third partner in our revels? said
Alcibiades, turning round and starting up as he caught sight of
Socrates. By Heracles, he said, what is this? here is Socrates
always lying in wait for me, and always, as his way is, coming out
at all sorts of unsuspected places: and now, what have you to say
for yourself, and why are you lying here, where I perceive that you
have contrived to find a place, not by a joker or lover of jokes, like
Aristophanes, but by the fairest of the company?
  Socrates turned to Agathon and said: I must ask you to protect me,
Agathon; for the passion of this man has grown quite a serious
matter to me. Since I became his admirer I have never been allowed
to speak to any other fair one, or so much as to look at them. If I
do, he goes wild with envy and jealousy, and not only abuses me but
can hardly keep his hands off me, and at this moment he may do me some
harm. Please to see to this, and either reconcile me to him, or, if he
attempts violence, protect me, as I am in bodily fear of his mad and
passionate attempts.
  There can never be reconciliation between you and me, said
Alcibiades; but for the present I will defer your chastisement. And
I must beg you, Agathoron, to give me back some of the ribands that
I may crown the marvellous head of this universal despot-I would not
have him complain of me for crowning you, and neglecting him, who in
conversation is the conqueror of all mankind; and this not only
once, as you were the day before yesterday, but always. Whereupon,
taking some of the ribands, he crowned Socrates, and again reclined.
  Then he said: You seem, my friends, to be sober, which is a thing
not to be endured; you must drink-for that was the agreement under
which I was admitted-and I elect myself master of the feast until
you are well drunk. Let us have a large goblet, Agathon, or rather, he
said, addressing the attendant, bring me that wine-cooler. The
wine-cooler which had caught his eye was a vessel holding more than
two quarts-this he filled and emptied, and bade the attendant fill
it again for Socrates. Observe, my friends, said Alcibiades, that this
ingenious trick of mine will have no effect on Socrates, for he can
drink any quantity of wine and not be at all nearer being drunk.
Socrates drank the cup which the attendant filled for him.
  Eryximachus said! What is this Alcibiades? Are we to have neither
conversation nor singing over our cups; but simply to drink as if we
were thirsty?
  Alcibiades replied: Hail, worthy son of a most wise and worthy sire!
  The same to you, said Eryximachus; but what shall we do?
  That I leave to you, said Alcibiades.

     The wise physician skilled our wounds to heal

shall prescribe and we will obey. What do you want?
  Well, said Eryximachus, before you appeared we had passed a
resolution that each one of us in turn should make a speech in
praise of love, and as good a one as he could: the turn was passed
round from left to right; and as all of us have spoken, and you have
not spoken but have well drunken, you ought to speak, and then
impose upon Socrates any task which you please, and he on his right
hand neighbour, and so on.
  That is good, Eryximachus, said Alcibiades; and yet the
comparison, of a drunken man's speech with those of sober men is
hardly fair; and I should like to know, sweet friend, whether you
really believe-what Socrates was just now saying; for I can assure you
that the very reverse is the fact, and that if I praise any one but
himself in his presence, whether God or man, he will hardly keep his
hands off me.
  For shame, said Socrates.
  Hold your tongue, said Alcibiades, for by Poseidon, there is no
one else whom I will praise when you are-of the company.
  Well then, said Eryximachus, if you like praise Socrates.
  What do you think, Eryximachus-? said Alcibiades: shall I attack
him: and inflict the punishment before you all?
  What are you about? said Socrates; are you going to raise a laugh at
my expense? Is that the meaning of your praise?
  I am going to speak the truth, if you will permit me.
  I not only permit, but exhort you to speak the truth.
  Then I will begin at once, said Alcibiades, and if I say anything
which is not true, you may interrupt me if you will, and say "that
is a lie," though my intention is to speak the truth. But you must not
wonder if I speak any how as things come into my mind; for the
fluent and orderly enumeration of all your singularities is not a task
which is easy to a man in my condition.
  And now, my boys, I shall praise Socrates in a figure which will
appear to him to be a caricature, and yet I speak, not to make fun
of him, but only for the truth's sake. I say, that he is exactly
like the busts of Silenus, which are set up in the statuaries,
shops, holding pipes and flutes in their mouths; and they are made
to open in the middle, and have images of gods inside them. I say also
that hit is like Marsyas the satyr. You yourself will not deny,
Socrates, that your face is like that of a satyr. Aye, and there is
a resemblance in other points too. For example, you are a bully, as
I can prove by witnesses, if you will not confess. And are you not a
flute-player? That you are, and a performer far more wonderful than
Marsyas. He indeed with instruments used to charm the souls of men
by the powers of his breath, and the players of his music do so still:
for the melodies of Olympus are derived from Marsyas who taught
them, and these, whether they are played by a great master or by a
miserable flute-girl, have a power which no others have; they alone
possess the soul and reveal the wants of those who have need of gods
and mysteries, because they are divine. But you produce the same
effect with your words only, and do not require the flute; that is the
difference between you and him. When we hear any other speaker, even
very good one, he produces absolutely no effect upon us, or not
much, whereas the mere fragments of you and your words, even at
second-hand, and however imperfectly repeated, amaze and possess the
souls of every man, woman, and child who comes within hearing of them.
And if I were not, afraid that you would think me hopelessly drunk,
I would have sworn as well as spoken to the influence which they
have always had and still have over me. For my heart leaps within me
more than that of any Corybantian reveller, and my eyes rain tears
when I hear them. And I observe that many others are affected in the
same manner. I have heard Pericles and other great orators, and I
thought that they spoke well, but I never had any similar feeling;
my soul was not stirred by them, nor was I angry at the thought of
my own slavish state. But this Marsyas has often brought me to such
pass, that I have felt as if I could hardly endure the life which I am
leading (this, Socrates, you will admit); and I am conscious that if I
did not shut my ears against him, and fly as from the voice of the
siren, my fate would be like that of others,-he would transfix me, and
I should grow old sitting at his feet. For he makes me confess that
I ought not to live as I do, neglecting the wants of my own soul,
and busying myself with the concerns of the Athenians; therefore I
hold my ears and tear myself away from him. And he is the only
person who ever made me ashamed, which you might think not to be in my
nature, and there is no one else who does the same. For I know that
I cannot answer him or say that I ought not to do as he bids, but when
I leave his presence the love of popularity gets the better of me. And
therefore I run away and fly from him, and when I see him I am ashamed
of what I have confessed to him. Many a time have I wished that he
were dead, and yet I know that I should be much more sorry than
glad, if he were to die: so that am at my wit's end.
  And this is what I and many others have suffered, from the
flute-playing of this satyr. Yet hear me once more while I show you
how exact the image is, and. how marvellous his power. For let me tell
you; none of you know him; but I will reveal him to you; having begun,
I must go on. See you how fond he is of the fair? He is always with
them and is always being smitten by them, and then again he knows
nothing and is ignorant of all thing such is the appearance which he
puts on. Is he not like a Silenus in this? To be sure he is: his outer
mask is the carved head of the Silenus; but, O my companions in drink,
when he is opened, what temperance there is residing within! Know
you that beauty and wealth and honour, at which the many wonder, are
of no account with him, and are utterly despised by him: he regards
not at all the persons who are gifted with them; mankind are nothing
to him; all his life is spent in mocking and flouting at them. But
when I opened him, and looked within at his serious purpose, I saw
in him divine and golden images of such fascinating beauty that I
was ready to do in a moment whatever Socrates commanded: they may have
escaped the observation of others, but I saw them. Now I fancied
that he was seriously enamoured of my beauty, and I thought that I
should therefore have a grand opportunity of hearing him tell what
he knew, for I had a wonderful opinion of the attractions of my youth.
In the prosecution of this design, when I next went to him, I sent
away the attendant who usually accompanied me (I will confess the
whole truth, and beg you to listen; and if I speak falsely, do you,
Socrates, expose the falsehood). Well, he and I were alone together,
and I thought that when there was nobody with us, I should hear him
speak the language which lovers use to their loves when they are by
themselves, and I was delighted. Nothing of the sort; he conversed
as usual, and spent the day with me and then went away. Afterwards I
challenged him to the palaestra; and he wrestled and closed with me,
several times when there was no one present; I fancied that I might
succeed in this manner. Not a bit; I made no way with him. Lastly,
as I had failed hitherto, I thought that I must take stronger measures
and attack him boldly, and, as I had begun, not give him up, but see
how matters stood between him and me. So I invited him to sup with me,
just as if he were a fair youth, and I a designing lover. He was not
easily persuaded to come; he did, however, after a while accept the
invitation, and when he came the first time, he wanted to go away at
once as soon as supper was over, and I had not the face to detain him.
The second time, still in pursuance of my design, after we had supped,
I went on conversing far into the night, and when he wanted to go
away, I pretended that the hour was late and that he had much better
remain. So he lay down on the couch next to me, the same on which he
had supped, and there was no one but ourselves sleeping in the
apartment. All this may be told without shame to any one. But what
follows I could hardly tell you if I were sober. Yet as the proverb
says, "In vino veritas," whether with boys, or without them; and
therefore I must speak. Nor, again, should I be justified in
concealing the lofty actions of Socrates when I come to praise him.
Moreover I have felt the serpent's sting; and he who has suffered,
as they say, is willing to tell his fellow-sufferers only, as they
alone will be likely to understand him, and will not be extreme in
judging of the sayings or doings which have been wrung from his agony.
For I have been bitten by a more than viper's tooth; I have known in
my soul, or in my heart, or in some other part, that worst of pangs,
more violent in ingenuous youth than any serpent's tooth, the pang
of philosophy, which will make a man say or do anything. And you
whom I see around me, Phaedrus and Agathon and Eryximachus and
Pausanias and Aristodemus and Aristophanes, all of you, and I need not
say Socrates himself, have had experience of the same madness and
passion in your longing after wisdom. Therefore listen and excuse my
doings then and my sayings now. But let the attendants and other
profane and unmannered persons close up the doors of their ears.
  When the lamp was put out and the servants had gone away, I
thought that I must be plain with him and have no more ambiguity. So I
gave him a shake, and I said: "Socrates, are you asleep?" "No," he
said. "Do you know what I am meditating? "What are you meditating?" he
said. "I think," I replied, "that of all the lovers whom I have ever
had you are the only one who is worthy of me, and you appear to be too
modest to speak. Now I feel that I should be a fool to refuse you this
or any other favour, and therefore I come to lay at your feet all that
I have and all that my friends have, in the hope that you will
assist me in the way of virtue, which I desire above all things, and
in which I believe that you can help me better than any one else.
And I should certainly have more reason to be ashamed of what wise men
would say if I were to refuse a favour to such as you, than of what
the world who are mostly fools, would say of me if I granted it." To
these words he replied in the ironical manner which is so
characteristic of him: "Alcibiades, my friend, you have indeed an
elevated aim if what you say is true, and if there really is in me any
power by which you may become better; truly you must see in me some
rare beauty of a kind infinitely higher than any which I see in you.
And therefore, if you mean to share with me and to exchange beauty for
beauty, you will have greatly the advantage of me; you will gain
true beauty in return for appearance-like Diomede, gold in exchange
for brass. But look again, sweet friend, and see whether you are not
deceived in me. The mind begins to grow critical when the bodily eye
fails, and it will be a long time before you get old." Hearing this, I
said: "I have told you my purpose, which is quite serious, and do
you consider what you think best for you and me." "That is good," he
said; "at some other time then we will consider and act as seems
best about this and about other matters." Whereupon, I fancied that
was smitten, and that the words which I had uttered like arrows had
wounded him, and so without waiting to hear more I got up, and
throwing my coat about him crept under his threadbare cloak, as the
time of year was winter, and there I lay during the whole night having
this wonderful monster in my arms. This again, Socrates, will not be
denied by you. And yet, notwithstanding all, he was so superior to
my solicitations, so contemptuous and derisive and disdainful of my
beauty-which really, as I fancied, had some attractions-hear, O
judges; for judges you shall be of the haughty virtue of
Socrates-nothing more happened, but in the morning when I awoke (let
all the gods and goddesses be my witnesses) I arose as from the
couch of a father or an elder brother.
  What do you suppose must have been my feelings, after this
rejection, at the thought of my own dishonour? And yet I could not
help wondering at his natural temperance and self-restraint and
manliness. I never imagined that I could have met with a man such as
he is in wisdom and endurance. And therefore I could not be angry with
him or renounce his company, any more than I could hope to win him.
For I well knew that if Ajax could not be wounded by steel, much
less he by money; and my only chance of captivating him by my personal
attractions had faded. So I was at my wit's end; no one was ever
more hopelessly enslaved by another. All this happened before he and I
went on the expedition to Potidaea; there we messed together, and I
had the opportunity of observing his extraordinary power of sustaining
fatigue. His endurance was simply marvellous when, being cut off
from our supplies, we were compelled to go without food-on such
occasions, which often happen in time of war, he was superior not only
to me but to everybody; there was no one to be compared to him. Yet at
a festival he was the only person who had any real powers of
enjoyment; though not willing to drink, he could if compelled beat
us all at that,-wonderful to relate! no human being had ever seen
Socrates drunk; and his powers, if I am not mistaken, will be tested
before long. His fortitude in enduring cold was also surprising. There
was a severe frost, for the winter in that region is really
tremendous, and everybody else either remained indoors, or if they
went out had on an amazing quantity of clothes, and were well shod,
and had their feet swathed in felt and fleeces: in the midst of
this, Socrates with his bare feet on the ice and in his ordinary dress
marched better than the other soldiers who had shoes, and they
looked daggers at him because he seemed to despise them.
  I have told you one tale, and now I must tell you another, which
is worth hearing, 'Of the doings and sufferings of the enduring
man', while he was on the expedition. One morning he was thinking
about something which he could not resolve; he would not give it up,
but continued thinking from early dawn until noon-there he stood fixed
in thought; and at noon attention was drawn to him, and the rumour ran
through the wondering crowd that Socrates had been standing and
thinking about something ever since the break of day. At last, in
the evening after supper, some Ionians out of curiosity (I should
explain that this was not in winter but in summer), brought out
their mats and slept in the open air that they might watch him and see
whether he would stand all night. There he stood until the following
morning; and with the return of light he offered up a prayer to the
sun, and went his way. I will also tell, if you please-and indeed I am
bound to tell of his courage in battle; for who but he saved my
life? Now this was the engagement in which I received the prize of
valour: for I was wounded and he would not leave me, but he rescued me
and my arms; and he ought to have received the prize of valour which
the generals wanted to confer on me partly on account of my rank,
and I told them so, (this, again Socrates will not impeach or deny),
but he was more eager than the generals that I and not he should
have the prize. There was another occasion on which his behaviour
was very remarkable-in the flight of the army after the battle of
Delium, where he served among the heavy-armed-I had a better
opportunity of seeing him than at Potidaea, for I was myself on
horseback, and therefore comparatively out of danger. He and Laches
were retreating, for the troops were in flight, and I met them and
told them not to be discouraged, and promised to remain with them; and
there you might see him, Aristophanes, as you describe, just as he
is in the streets of Athens, stalking like a and rolling his eyes,
calmly contemplating enemies as well as friends, and making very
intelligible to anybody, even from a distance, that whoever attacked
him would be likely to meet with a stout resistance; and in this way
he and his companion escaped-for this is the sort of man who is
never touched in war; those only are pursued who are running away
headlong. I particularly observed how superior he was to Laches in
presence of mind. Many are the marvels which I might narrate in praise
of Socrates; most of his ways might perhaps be paralleled in another
man, but his absolute unlikeness to any human being that is or ever
has been is perfectly astonishing. You may imagine Brasidas and others
to have been like Achilles; or you may imagine Nestor and Antenor to
have been like Perides; and the same may be said of other famous
men, but of this strange being you will never be able to find any
likeness, however remote, either among men who now are or who ever
have been-other than that which I have already suggested of Silenus
and the satyrs; and they represent in a figure not only himself, but
his words. For, although I forgot to mention this to you before, his
words are like the images of Silenus which open; they are ridiculous
when you first hear them; he clothes himself in language that is
like the skin of the wanton satyr-for his talk is of pack-asses and
smiths and cobblers and curriers, and he is always repeating the
same things in the same words, so that any ignorant or inexperienced
person might feel disposed to laugh at him; but he who opens the
bust and sees what is within will find that they are the only words
which have a meaning in them, and also the most divine, abounding in
fair images of virtue, and of the widest comprehension, or rather
extending to the whole duty of a good and honourable man.
  This, friends, is my praise of Socrates. I have added my blame of
him for his ill-treatment of me; and he has ill-treated not only me,
but Charmides the son of Glaucon, and Euthydemus the son of Diocles,
and many others in the same way-beginning as their lover he has
ended by making them pay their addresses to him. Wherefore I say to
you, Agathon, "Be no deceived by him; learn from me: and take warning,
and do not be a fool and learn by experience, as the proverb says."
  When Alcibiades had finished, there was a laugh at his
outspokenness; for he seemed to be still in love with Socrates. You
are sober, Alcibiades, said Socrates, or you would never have gone
so far about to hide the purpose of your satyr's praises, for all this
long story is only an ingenious circumlocution, of which the point
comes in by the way at the end; you want to get up a quarrel between
me and Agathon, and your notion-is that I ought to love you and nobody
else, and that you and you only ought to love Agathon. But the plot of
this Satyric or Silenic drama has been detected, and you must not
allow him, Agathon, to set us at variance.
  I believe you are right, said Agathon, and I am disposed to think
that his intention in placing himself between you and me was only to
divide us; but he shall gain nothing by that move; for I will go and
lie on the couch next to you.
  Yes, yes, replied Socrates, by all means come here and lie on the
couch below me.
  Alas, said Alcibiades, how I am fooled by this man; he is determined
to get the better of me at every turn. I do beseech you, allow Agathon
to lie between us.
  Certainly not, said Socrates, as you praised me, and I in turn ought
to praise my neighbour on the right, he will be out of order in
praising me again when he ought rather to be praised by me, and I must
entreat you to consent to this, and not be jealous, for I have a great
desire to praise the youth.
  Hurrah! cried Agathon, I will rise instantly, that I may be
praised by Socrates.
  The usual way, said Alcibiades; where Socrates is, no one else has
any chance with the fair; and now how readily has he invented a
specious reason for attracting Agathon to himself.
  Agathon arose in order that he might take his place on the couch
by Socrates, when suddenly a band of revellers entered, and spoiled
the order of the banquet. Some one who was going out having left the
door open, they had found their way in, and made themselves at home;
great confusion ensued, and every one was compelled to drink large
quantities of wine. Aristodemus said that Eryximachus, Phaedrus, and
others went away-he himself fell asleep, and as the nights were long
took a good rest: he was awakened towards daybreak by a crowing of
cocks, and when he awoke, the others were either asleep, or had gone
away; there remained only Socrates, Aristophanes, and Agathon, who
were drinking out of a large goblet which they passed round, and
Socrates was discoursing to them. Aristodemus was only half awake, and
he did not hear the beginning of the discourse; the chief thing
which he remembered was Socrates compelling the other two to
acknowledge that the genius of comedy was the same with that of
tragedy, and that the true artist in tragedy was an artist in comedy
also. To this they were constrained to assent, being drowsy, and not
quite following the argument. And first of all Aristophanes dropped
off, then, when the day was already dawning, Agathon. Socrates, having
laid them to sleep, rose to depart; Aristodemus, as his manner was,
following him. At the Lyceum he took a bath, and passed the day as
usual. In the evening he retired to rest at his own home.


                              -THE END-
.

